concanavalin a induces autophagy in hepatoma cells
and has a therapeutic effect in a murine in situ
hepatoma model
chih-peng chang,1 ming-cheng yang,2 hsiao-sheng liu,2 yee-shin lin,2 and huan-yao lei1,2*
concanavalin a (cona), a lectin with mannose speciﬁcity that can induce acute hepatic
inﬂammation, was tested for its therapeutic effect against hepatoma. cona is cytotoxic or
inhibitory to hepatoma cells, which is mediated by the autophagic pathway through mito-
chondria. once it was bound to cell membrane glycoproteins, the cona was internalized and
preferentially localized onto the mitochondria. the mitochondria membrane permeability
changed, and an autophagic pathway including lc3-ii generation, double-layer vesicle,
bnip3 induction, and acidic vesicular organelle formation was induced. either 3-ma or
sirna for bnip3 and lc3, but neither beclin-1 nor atg 5, partially inhibited the cona-
induced cell death. in addition to the autophagy induction, cona is known to be a t cell
mitogen. using an in situ hepatoma model, cona can exert an anti-hepatoma therapeutic
effect, inhibiting tumor nodule formation in the liver and prolonging survival. conclusion:
cona can be considered as an anti-hepatoma agent therapeutically because of its autophagic
induction and immunomodulating activity. this dual function of cona provides a novel
mechanism for the biological effect of lectin. (hepatology 2007;45:286-296.)
reversibly and possess
lectins are carbohydrate-binding proteins that oc-
cur throughout the biosphere. they bind carbohy-
drates
the ability to
agglutinate cells or precipitate polysaccharides and glyco-
conjugates. they have strong mitogenic activity to lym-
phocytes.1-3 lectins have been used to differentiate
malignant tumors from benign and the degree of glyco-
sylation associated with metastasis.4,5 lectins have also
been adopted for alternative tumor therapy in europe.6-8
hepatocellular carcinoma is the predominant cause of
cancer mortality in males of southern china and taiwan.
abbreviations: 3-ma, 3-methyladenine; aif, apoptosis-inducing factor; atg 5,
autophagy-related protein 5; bnip3, bcl-2/adenovirus e1b 19 kda-interacting
protein 3; cona, concanavalin a; lc3, microtubule-associated protein light chain
3; mtt, methyl-thiazol-tetrazolium; sirna, small interfering rna.
from the 1institute of basic medical sciences and the 2department of microbi-
ology and immunology, college of medicine, national cheng kung university,
tainan, taiwan, republic of china.
received july 21, 2006; accepted october 24, 2006.
supported by grant nsc91-2320-b006-036, nsc94-3112-b006-005 from
the national science council, taiwan.
address reprint requests to: dr. huan-yao lei, professor, department of micro-
biology and immunology, college of medicine, national cheng kung university,
tainan, taiwan, republic of china. e-mail: hylei@mail.ncku.edu.tw;
fax:
886-6-2097825.
copyright © 2007 by the american association for the study of liver diseases.
published online in wiley interscience (www.interscience.wiley.com).
doi 10.1002/hep.21509
potential conﬂict of interest: nothing to report.
supplementary material for this article can be found on the hepatology website
(http://interscience.wiley.com/jpages/0270-9139/suppmat/index.html).
286
the current therapy for hcc is not satisfactory,9,10 and
more studies are needed to develop a more effective treat-
ment of hcc. we are interested in developing new ther-
apies for liver tumor and in testing whether lectins have
any therapeutic effect for liver cancer. concanavalin a
(cona) is a t-cell mitogen and has been used to induce
hepatitis in mice through the triggering of natural killer
(nk) t cells and subsequent activation of cd4⫹ t
cells.11,12 autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved lyso-
somal pathway involved in cytoplasmic homeostasis to
control the turnover of long-lived proteins and can be
stimulated in response to different situations of stress,
such as starvation, oxidative stress, irradiation, or even
anti-cancer cytotoxic drugs.13 we reported here that
cona could also directly cause tumor cell death in an
autophagic manner. the in vivo anti-hepatoma effect of
cona was further demonstrated in a recently established
murine in situ hepatoma model.14
materials and methods
reagents and antibodies. cona, cona-fitc,
cona-beaded agarose and 3-methyladenine (3-ma) were
purchased from sigma (st. louis, mo). the antiserum
against microtubule-associated proteins light chain 3
(lc3), beclin-1, autophagy-related protein 5 (atg 5),
and phosphorylated akt (p-akt) were purchased from
santa cruz (santa cruz, ca). anti-akt, anti-caspase 3
hepatology, vol. 45, no. 2, 2007
chang et al.
287
and anti-apoptosis-inducing factor (aif) antibodies were
purchased from cell signaling (beverly, ma). the anti-
body against bcl-2/adenovirus e1b 19 kd-interacting
protein 3 (bnip3), or endonuclease g (endo g) was
purchased from sigma. anti-poly(adp-ribose) polymer-
ase, cox iv, and gapdh antibodies were purchased
from pharmingen (san diego, ca), abcam (cambridge,
uk), and ambion (austin, tx), respectively. rna inter-
ferences of aif, beclin-1, atg 5, lc3 and unrelated
control sequence were performed using small interfering
rna (sirna) purchased from santa cruz. sirna for
bnip3 was purchased from invitrogen (carlsbad, ca).
cell lines and mice. the balb/c hepatoma cell line
ml-1 was provided by dr. c. p. hu (veterans general
hospital, taipei, taiwan).15 ml-14a cells were adapted
from ml-1 cells in balb/c mice for four generations.
balb/c mice (male, 8-10 weeks old) were purchased
from national laboratory animal center (taipei, tai-
wan); nod/ltsz-prkdcj (scid) mice were provided by
the animal center of tzu-chi university (hualien, tai-
wan) and maintained in the pathogen-free facility of the
animal laboratory of national cheng kung university.
the animals were raised and cared for according to the
guidelines set up by the national science council, roc.
the mouse experiments were approved by the institu-
tional animal care and use committee.
cell growth assay. ml-14a, ct-26, huh-7 and
hepg2 cells were seeded at 1 ⫻ 105 cells in 12-well plates.
the cells were treated with cona in the presence or ab-
sence of methyl-␣d-mannopyranoside (0.1 m). after in-
cubation, viable cell number was measured by counting
viable cells with eosin y exclusion staining or 3h-thymi-
dine incorporation assay. in inhibition experiments, the
cells were pre-treated with zvad-fmk (100 ␮m) or var-
ious concentrations of 3-ma 1 hour before addition of
cona (40 ␮g/ml). after incubation, cell growth was mea-
sured by methyl-thiazol-tetrazolium (mtt) assay. cell
death was determined by staining with propidium iodide
and analyzing by ﬂow cytometry.
flow cytometry assay. cells (1 ⫻ 105) were incu-
bated with 5 ␮g/ml fitc-conjugated cona for 30 min-
utes at 37°c. the binding of cona to cells was detected
by ﬂow cytometry. methyl-␣d-mannopyranoside (0.5
m) was used to block the speciﬁc binding. the acidic
vesicular organelles were detected by acridine orange (1
␮g/ml). the development of acidic vesicular organelles
was analyzed. the mitochondrial membrane potential (⌬
⌿m) was measured by rhodamine 123 (5 ␮m).
microscopic examination. ml-14a cells (5 ⫻ 105)
were transfected with plc3-gfp (5 ␮g).16 using lipo-
fectamine 2000 (invitrogen). the ﬂuorescence of lc3-
gfp was observed under a ﬂuorescence microscope
(olympus ix 70, melville, ny). to localize the cellular
distribution of cona, ml-14a cells treated with cona-
fitc were further stained with 1 ␮g/ml mitotracker
red or lysotracker red (molecular probe, or) and ﬁxed
with 3.7% formaldehyde. in the parallel experiments, the
cells treated with cona-fitc were stained with primary
antibody against calnexin followed by secondary antibody
conjugated with alexa 594. the distribution of cona
within cells was analyzed by confocal microscopy (olym-
pus fv 300, japan). to observe the autophagic vesicles,
the ml-14a cells were treated with cona, ﬁxed with 4%
glutaraldehyde, and postﬁxed in 1% oso4. the cells were
observed under the electron microscopy (hitachi 7000,
japan).
western blot analysis. cell lysates were prepared by
extracting proteins with lysis buffer. proteins were sepa-
rated by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel elec-
trophoresis and transferred to pvdf membranes. the
membranes were blocked and incubated with primary
antibodies. after incubation with peroxidase-conjugated
secondary antibodies, the blots were visualized by enhanc-
ing chemiluminescence reagents (perkinelimer life sci-
ences, boston, ma). in some experiments, the nuclear
and cytoplasmic fractions of cells were prepared using the
kit “ne-per nuclear and cytoplasmic extraction re-
agents” (pierce, rockford, il).
murine in situ hepatoma model. a murine in situ
hepatoma model was set up by intrasplenic injection of
1 ⫻ 106 viable ml-14a cells in 0.1 ml dmem into anes-
thetized mice (pentobarbital, 50 mg/kg intraperitoneal-
ly).14 the ml-14a ﬁrst colonized in the spleen and then
migrated into the liver, forming liver tumor nodules of
varied sizes beginning 1 week after injection. at 30 days
after intrasplenic injection, the livers of hepatoma-bearing
mice were removed to determine the numbers and sizes of
the tumor nodules.
results
cona binding to hepatoma cells induced growth
inhibition and cell death. the binding of fitc-
cona on 4 tumor cell lines was tested using ﬂow cytom-
etry. cona could bind to 3 hepatoma cell lines—ml-14a,
huh-7, hepg2—and colon cell line ct-26 in a man-
nose-speciﬁc manner, which was blocked by the ligand
methyl-␣d-mannopyranoside (fig. 1a). the binding of
cona to ml-14a, ct-26, huh-7, and hepg2 tumor cell
lines inhibited their cell replication in a dose-dependent
manner (fig. 1b). the addition of the methyl-␣d-man-
nopyranoside also reversed the cona-induced growth in-
hibition. the sensitivity to cona-induced cell growth
inhibition varied among four tumor cell lines: hepg2
288
chang et al.
hepatology, february 2007
fig. 1. cona–induced hepatoma cell growth inhibition through mannose binding moiety. (a) cona bond to hepatoma cells (ml-14a, huh-7, hepg2,
and ct-26) through mannose moiety that is inhibited by methyl-␣-d-mannopyranoside. (b, c) cona inhibited hepatoma cell growth (b), induced cell
death (c), and inhibited cell proliferation (d). *p ⬍ 0.05 versus pbs control.
was the most sensitive, followed by ct-26, ml-14a, and
huh-7. the ic50 of cona for hepg2, ct-26, ml-14a,
and huh-7 were 5, 10, 10, and 20 ␮g/ml, respectively.
the growth inhibition at dose ⬎ 20 ␮g/ml was due to the
induction of cell death as the cell viability decreased along
the incubation time of cona (fig. 1c). however, at the
low dose of 1 to 5 ␮g/ml, the cell proliferation was inhib-
ited as well, shown by the signiﬁcant inhibition of
[3h]thymidine incorporation on ml-14a cells (fig. 1d).
cona-induced autophagic-like cell death of hep-
atoma cells. the mechanism of cona-induced cell
death was studied. cona-treated cells were annexin v-
positive, but no dna ladder or typical apoptosis were
observed (data not shown). we went further to test
whether cona could induce another type of cell death,
the autophagic cell death. as shown in fig. 2a, cona-
treated lc3-gfp–transfected ml-14a cells showed the
lc3-gfp aggregation as early as 6 hours posttreatment,
suggesting that autophagy occurred after cona treat-
ment. the signal molecules involved in the process of
autophagy are shown in fig. 2b. the autophagic marker
lc3-ii was formed at 12 hours posttreatment. in addi-
tion, de novo synthesis of lc3-i was also found after
cona treatment. another autophagic molecule, beclin-1,
was not increased after cona treatment, probably because
of its abundance in ml-14a cells. instead it was slightly
decreased at the late 36th hour. the bnip3 either mono-
mer or dimer form were induced at 6 hours posttreat-
ment. phosphorylated akt was also downregulated,
indicating that the growth signal of akt was altered after
cona treatment. the long stable cox-iv was decreased
at 12 hours posttreatment. under electronic microscopic
observation on the cona-treated ml-14a cells, the dou-
ble-layer vesicle and many autophagosomes were detected
at 12 hours posttreatment (fig. 2c). the lysosomal activ-
ity as detected by acridine orange staining was also in-
creased after cona treatment (fig. 2d). cona-induced
autophagic-like cell death was not only observed in ml-
fig. 2. cona-induced autophagy in hepatoma cell
lines. (a) cona-induced lc3 aggregation in ml-14a cells. the lc3-gfp aggregation of
cona-treated ml-14a cells was visualized at the indicated times by ﬂuorescence microscopy. (b) analysis of the signal molecules involved in
autophagic pathway. ml-14a cell lysates were collected at the indicated times after incubation with cona (40 ␮g/ml) and detected with anti-lc3,
anti-beclin-1, anti-bnip3, anti-phosphorylated akt, anti-akt, or anti-cox-iv antibodies. (c) electron micrographs (⫻12,000, ⫻30,000) of
cona-treated ml-14a cells. the autophagic vesicles (arrows) with double-layer (low left-corner) were shown. (d) cona-induced hepatoma cells to form
acidic vesicular organelles stained with acridine orange. (e) cona-induced four tumor cell lines to undergo lc3-ii conversion.
290
chang et al.
hepatology, february 2007
fig. 3. 3-ma partially blocked the cona-induced lc3-ii conversion and cell death. (a) ml-14a cells were pretreated with various concentration of
3-ma 1 hour before cona (40 ␮g/ml) treatment. the cell growth was determined by mtt assay. (b, c) 3-ma (2 mm) inhibited lc3-ii conversion and
cell death. a representative western blot is shown, and the mean ⫾ sd of three experiments are indicated. (d, e) caspase-3 was not activated during
cona-induced ml-14a cell death. zvad-fmk was used as pan-caspase inhibitor. the means ⫾ sd of 3 experiments are shown. *p ⬍ 0.05 versus
control.
14a cell line; cona-treated huh-7, hepg2, and ct-26
cells also showed enhanced lysosomal activity and lc3-ii
formation (fig. 2d,e). we further used the autophagy
inhibitor 3-ma, a class iii-pi3k inhibitor, to inhibit the
pre-autophagosome formation. by mtt assay, different
doses of 3-ma could partially block the cona-induced
growth inhibition (fig. 3a). the induction of lc3-i and
lc3-ii formation and the autophagic cell death were also
partially inhibited by 2 mm of 3-ma (fig. 3b,c). the
cona-induced cell death was caspase-independent with
no cleavage caspase-3 being detected, which is not attrib-
utable to the defect of caspase-3 in ml-14a cells because
the etoposide can induce caspase-3 activation (fig. 3d).
the pan-caspase inhibitor zvad-fmk had no effect on
cona-induced cell death even at a high dose of 100 ␮m
(fig. 3e). based on these data, we concluded that cona
hepatology, vol. 45, no. 2, 2007
chang et al.
291
fig. 4. cona effect was mediated by internalization and targeted to mitochondria. (a,b) immobilized cona failed to induce ml-14a cell death and
lc3-ii conversion. various concentrations of soluble or beaded-agarose cona were incubated with ml-14a cells for different times, and the cell
proliferation was evaluated by mtt assay. (c) cona was internalized and bound to cytoplasmic organelles. ml-14a cells were incubated with cona–fitc
(40 mg/ml) at 37°c for 1 or 3 hours. the cells were stained with mitotracker red, lysotracker red, or anti-calnexin antibody as indicators of
mitochondria, lysosome, or endoplasmic reticulum (er), respectively, then observed under a confocal microscope. cona preferentially bound to the
mitochondria. (d) cona caused mitochondrial membrane potential (mmp) reduction in ml-14a cells. cona-treated ml-14a cells were stained with
rhodamine 123 to detect the mmp by ﬂow cytometry at the indicated times. (e) aif and endo g were translocated into nucleus at late 24 hours
after cona treatment. n, nuclear; c, cytoplasmic.
  
z92 chang et al hepatdlogy, fcbruary 2007
u s)
a pbs 9 - — — n
cuna - 1' + 9 u ‘0 v
cmlisna — — + _ :3“ gm
aifsirna - - — + 3., g”
elm
u .
, .1 m- .
_"“°"" .... ﬁg 5- ..j *
«gadw,w 19 6”” j...»
m... cm
pbs 9 — - -
b cona - , + v
comlslm — — - o- ; so
boclln1isna - -- v — i =5}?
.,. u)
em“ 2 -
:3 gm
315311. 32 gm
—+s-aw» 3' . «n
" n‘ w * av» " was- w y» w“
www w‘ w
”a m.
c pas 4- - - —
cana - + 1- q
conhnlisna — — — o ,m =2: -
aygssirna e“ -
e“ 3.
i i
4—lc3-i 3w :-
4—lca4l g u
115
e + «m “ ‘ .7
"‘ ﬁaaﬁwﬂ” "' ”nw?“
pas ' cu“ m";
cma - § f o u u
conh'oisirna — — — 4» .5 e3.
lcaslm - - o - g“ -:1'—- _“'
<— l 3.: g .. s“,
<— l 3le g i a
.. in
—+ '"wlﬂ'nﬂl é °
5” .n
— <- bnipmimiiw") ‘ u -~ n
—+ﬂ-""" "' "’w’t—d" "‘ ”xo’iw"
a... and
pbs 4» - — -
cnna — ~ + + ‘5 5..
ampuim-u — — + - “n e..=____
bnipjsirna-b — - - 4 in;
:w
i x _a d—anmmmnr) in
<— mrslmu) 5l,
hm e:
d—lci-ll m
g.»
_l + m"
hepatology, vol. 45, no. 2, 2007
chang et al.
293
could induce hepatoma cells to undergo autophagic-like
cell death.
cona was internalized to induce autophagy.
cona binds to cell surface glycoprotein by its mannose-
binding activity, but apparently the surface binding is not
enough to induce autophagic-like cell death because the
immobilized cona to bead would not induce growth
inhibition or lc3-ii formation on ml-14a cells (fig.
4a,b). we then used the fitc-cona to track its cellular
localization (fig. 4c). the soluble cona was ﬁrst bound
to cell membrane, then internalized and accumulated pri-
marily onto the mitochondria as early as 1 hour posttreat-
ment. some of the labeled cona was also found in the
lysosome at 3 hours, but not in the endoplasmic reticu-
lum. the internalized cona preferentially bound to the
mitochondria and would gradually increase mitochondria
membrane permeability change as shown in fig. 4d. the
endo g or aif in the mitochondria would be released
and translocated into the nucleus, but only at the late 24
hours after cona treatment (fig. 4e). the cona after
endocytosis would bind to mitochondria to cause mito-
chondria dysfunction and induce autophagy. however,
the cona-induced ml-14a cell death was only slightly
inhibited by silencing aif expression with sirna (fig.
5a). this indicates that aif nuclear translocation only
partially contributes to cona-induced ml-14a cell death.
furthermore, the sirna for beclin-1, atg 5, or lc3 was
tested in cona-induced ml-14a cell death. the lc3-ii
conversion induced by cona was slightly inhibited by
beclin-1 sirna, but not by atg 5 sirna. however,
cona-induced cell death was not affected by either be-
clin-1 or atg 5 sirna (fig. 5b,c). nevertheless, cona-
induced lc3-ii conversion and cell death were blocked
by lc3 sirna, suggesting that lc3 plays a major role in
cona-induced cell death (fig. 5d). because the bnip3
was formed at 6 hours, earlier than lc3-ii conversion as
shown previously, two different sirna for bnip3 were
then used to knock-down the bnip3 formation, and
both the lc3-ii conversion and cell death were inhibited
(fig. 5e). on the contrary, the lc3 sirna would not
affect the bnip3 induction, indicating that the mito-
chondria bnip3 was upstream of lc3-ii. a mitochon-
dria autophagic pathway was
induced after cona
treatment.
cona inhibited liver tumor nodule formation in
vivo. the direct in vivo effect of cona was further tested
on liver tumor nodule formation in severe combined im-
mune deﬁciency (scid) mice. the scid mice were in-
oculated by intra-spleen injection of 1 ⫻ 106 ml-14a
cells, which would colonize ﬁrst in the spleen and then
migrate to the liver to form tumor nodules in liver. at 1
week post inoculation, cona was given to hepatoma-
bearing mice intravenously twice at 3-day intervals. we
found that cona at a dose of 20 mg/kg inhibited liver
tumor formation in scid mice at 21 days after tumor
inoculation (fig. 6a), whereas the doses of 10 and 15
mg/kg had no effect. this indicates that cona has a direct
inhibitory effect on liver tumor nodule formation inde-
pendent of lymphocyte activation. cona is known to be a
strong t-cell mitogen, so we tested its therapeutic effect
on immunocompetent balb/c mice. the intra-spleen
injection of 1 ⫻ 106 ml-14a cells established the tumor
nodule formation in the liver. one week after inoculation,
the hepatoma-bearing mice were treated intravenously
with cona (7.5 mg/kg body weight) twice at 3-day inter-
vals. liver tumor nodule formation was inhibited signiﬁ-
cantly (fig. 6b,c). the control mice had 150 tumor
nodules of varying sizes, whereas the cona-treated mice
had only 40 tumor nodules 30 days after tumor injection.
the numbers of large tumor nodules (1-4 mm or ⬎4
mm) decreased dramatically. approximately 30% to 40%
of the mice were tumor-free. in the survival experiment,
the survival of the hepatoma-bearing mice was prolonged
from 40 to 70 days after cona treatment, whereas 20% to
30% of the mice were cured (fig. 6d). because cona
(7.5 mg/kg) was given only twice at days 7 and 10, the
residue tumors would continue growing and kill the non-
tumor-free mice. when we increased the dose of cona
and the number of injections, for example, to 20 mg/kg
and 4 times, the liver tumor nodules could be completely
eradicated (data not shown). the histological tissue stain-
ing showed many lymphocytic inﬁltrations around the
liver tumor nodule after cona injection (supplementary
fig. 1; available at: http://interscience.wiley.com/jpages/
0270-9139/suppmat/index.html). the cona-activated
lymphocyte would inﬁltrate into the liver to kill the hep-
atoma cells. however, there was no apparent hepatocytes
damage at the sub-optimal dose of 7.5 mg/kg used, and
4™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™™
fig. 5. autophagy-related proteins and bnip3 regulated the cona-induced lc3-ii conversion and cell death. ml-14a cells were treated with sirnas
(100 nm) of (a) aif, (b) beclin-1, (c) atg 5, (d) lc3, (e) bnip3, or unrelated sequences (control) for 16 hours and incubated with cona (40 ␮g/ml)
for another 24 hours. the expression of aif, beclin-1, atg 5, lc3-i/ii, and bnip3 were analyzed and quantiﬁed by immunoblotting analysis, and
normalization to ␤-actin control was expressed. the cona-induced ml-14a cell death was also determined after silencing of autophagy-related proteins
and bnip3 expression by the pi stain on ﬂow cytometry. a representative western blot is shown, and the mean ⫾ sd of 2 to 3 experiments are
indicated.
294
chang et al.
hepatology, february 2007
fig. 6. cona inhibited liver tumor nodule formation in vivo. (a) cona inhibited liver tumor nodule formation in scid mice. intraspleen inoculation
of 1 ⫻ 106 ml-14a established tumor nodule formation in the liver of scid mice. cona given twice at 3-day intervals beginning at day 7 inhibited
tumor nodule formation (n ⫽ 7). at day 21, the number and size of the tumor nodules in the liver were determined. the experiment was repeated
twice with the same results. (b-d) cona inhibited liver tumor nodule formation in balb/c mice. intra-spleen inoculation of 1 ⫻ 106 ml-14a
established tumor nodule formation in the liver of balb/c mice. cona (7.5 mg/kg) was given twice at 3-day intervals beginning at day 7. at day
30 or 32, the number and sizes of the tumor nodules in the liver were determined. cona caused hepatoma regression in the liver of 1-week-long
hepatoma-bearing mice (b,c, n ⫽ 7), and prolonged the survival of the tumor-bearing mice (d, n ⫽ 10). the experiments were repeated three times
with the same results. *p ⬍ 0.05 versus pbs control. (e) cona-mediated liver tumor nodule inhibition is cd8⫹ t cell dependent. the cd4⫹ or cd8⫹
lymphocytes were depleted by anti-cd4 (gk1.5) or anti-cd8 (2.43) mab 7 days before tumor inoculation and every 7 days thereafter during the
experimental period. one week after intraspleen inoculation, the hepatoma-bearing mice were treated intravenously with cona (7.5 mg/kg body
weight) twice at 3-day intervals. at day 30, the number and size of the tumor nodules in the liver were determined (n ⫽ 8).
hepatology, vol. 45, no. 2, 2007
chang et al.
295
the serum alt was not elevated during the treatment
course (supplementary fig. 2). cona seems to be less
cytotoxic to normal hepatocytes in tumor-bearing mice
than in naı¨ve mice, probably because of more binding to
tumor cells than to normal hepatocytes. the cells that
participated in this inhibition were further tested with in
vivo depletion of cd4⫹ or cd8⫹ t cells (fig. 6e). de-
pletion of cd8⫹ t cells blocked the anti-tumor effect of
cona. more tumor nodules were present in cd8⫹ t-
depleted mice than in non-depleted mice, suggesting that
cd8⫹ cells played a major role in the cona-mediated
anti-hepatoma activity. depletion of cd4⫹ t cells also
partially affected the cona anti-tumor activity. in the
control group, however, cd4⫹ t depletion also partially
inhibited the tumor formation in the pbs-treated group.
the role of cd4⫹ t cells in anti-hepatoma activity needs
further investigation. based on the above data, we con-
clude that cona, a mannose-speciﬁc binding lectin, can
induce autophagic-like cell death of hepatoma cells in
vitro and also can exert its direct cytotoxicity in vivo. fur-
thermore, because of its immunomodulating activity,
cona is more potent in immunocompetent mice and can
have anti-hepatoma activity through the activation of
lymphocytes. therefore, it can be considered for use as an
anti-hepatoma agent therapeutically.
discussion
lectins such as cona are known to be t-cell mitogens
and are cytotoxic to cells.17 using its unique characteris-
tics of the sugar-binding speciﬁcity, we found that cona
can induce differential effects on hepatoma cells and lym-
phocytes; the induction of autophagy on hepatoma cells,
and activation of lymphocytes. lymphocytes are more
sensitive to cona than hepatoma tumor cell lines, prob-
ably because of their high content of mannose- or glucose-
containing moieties on the cell membrane. cona at doses
of 1 to 10 ␮g/ml is mitogenic but becomes toxic at doses
above 50 ␮g/ml. autophagic-like cell death induction
was observed at doses higher than 20 ␮g/ml, and its sen-
sitivity varied on different cell lines.
the mechanism of cona-induced growth inhibition
or cytotoxicity is delineated as the autophagic pathway,
primarily mediated through the mitochondria. cona af-
ter binding to cell membrane would be internalized and
accumulated preferentially in to the mitochondria. the
mitochondria membrane permeability was changed. al-
though the endo g or aif in the mitochondria would
release and translocate into the nucleus later, the typical
caspase-dependent apoptosis was not observed. however,
the sirna for the aif slightly inhibited cona-induced
cell death, indicating that aif translocation into the nu-
cleus only partially contributes to the death process. after
onset of mitochondria permeability transition induced by
stimulus, autophagy would be activated to lead to lysoso-
mal degradation of the affected mitochondria and cell
repair.18 the autophagic pathway molecules including
lc3-ii formation, double-layer vesicle, bnip3 induc-
tion, and acidic vesicular organelle formation were dem-
onstrated in this study. the class iii-pi3k inhibitor
3-ma partially inhibited the cona-induced autophagic-
like cell death. the bnip3, an adenovirus e1b 19-kda
interacting protein that is a cell death–inducing factor and
a member of the bh3-only subfamily of bcl-2 family
protein, was detected at 6 hours, earlier than the forma-
tion of lc3-ii at 12 hours. a major function of this class
of protein is to determine the on/off state of the mito-
chondria permeability transition pore.19 recently, a short
mitochondria form of p19arf that localized in the com-
partment of the mitochondria could reduce mitochondria
membrane potential and then caused autophagy and
caspase-independent cell death.20 we found that the
sirna for bnip3 and lc3, but neither beclin-1 nor
atg 5, could inhibit the cona-induced cell death. the
sirna of bnip3 could knock down the bnip3 induc-
tion as well as the lc3-ii conversion, whereas the sirna
of lc3 inhibited only the lc3-ii, but not bnip3 induc-
tion. we did not observe the inhibition of the cona–
induced ml-14a cell death by the sirna for beclin-1 or
atg 5, indicating that it is not a typical or global auto-
phagic cell death. instead, a bnip3-mediated mitochon-
dria autophagy was induced after cona treatment. the
autophagy induced by the cona would provide a novel
mechanism for the lectin.
the liver can trap blood-borne foreign substances, and
its anatomic location makes it a good site to concentrate
cona. cona trapped in the liver binds to hepatocytes
through its speciﬁc binding activity with mannose residue
on cell membrane glycoproteins. cona accumulated in
the liver then directly induces hepatic inﬂammation to
cause liver tumor regression. cona not only activates im-
mune cells, but also agglutinates then to hepatoma cells in
the liver. the inﬂammatory response initiated by the
cona would subsequently induce the adaptive immune
response against the transplantation tumor. the activated
cd8⫹ t cells became the major effector cells to kill the
tumor cells. this process would lead to the establishment
of the tumor-speciﬁc memory immunity to protect from
further challenge with the same tumor (unpublished ob-
servation).
recently, miyagi et al.21 reported the anti-tumor effect
of cona via nk cell- and ifn-␥– dependent manners in
the ct-26 hepatic metastasis model. cona has been re-
ported to be hepatocyte-cytotoxic.17,22 in this study, we
further reported that cona can induce hepatoma cells to
296
chang et al.
hepatology, february 2007
undergo autophagy, and the direct anti-tumor effect was
observed on hepatoma-bearing scid mice. however, the
use of cona as an anti-hepatoma agent is dependent on
the time, dose, and frequency of administration. cona
can induce acute hepatitis in a naive mouse at a dose of 15
to 20 mg/kg by activating nk t and cd4⫹ t cells.11,12
the hepatotoxic dose is usually higher than 15 to 20
mg/kg. at the dose of 7.5 mg/kg used in this study, no
elevation of serum alt in hepatoma-bearing mice was
observed (supplementary fig. 2); however, when the
cona dose was increased to 20 mg/kg, the serum level of
alt was slightly elevated, but it was still far less than that
in the naı¨ve mice. there seems to be a therapeutic window
for tumor-bearing mice compared with the naı¨ve mice.
the inﬁltrating t cells are found spread around the whole
liver section, but more t cells deposited on the tumor
parts (supplementary fig. 1). many reports have sug-
gested that malignant transformation is associated with
various and complex alterations in the glycosylation pro-
cess.4,5 this carbohydrate-differential expression can be
used to develop tumor-preferential killing for a more in-
vasive and metastatic phenotype with some particular lec-
tins.23,24 although this result seems promising, there is a
caveat for the continuing injection of cona in vivo. mice
would become insensitive to cona after repetitive chal-
lenge of cona, the mice would develop t-cell anergy via
production of il-10 after multiple administrations of
cona.25 we also detected anti-cona antibodies after ﬁve
or six injections of cona (unpublished observation). the
generation of anti-cona antibody, which is a common
problem encountered in the use of protein drugs, will
restrict the continuing use of cona. to avoid this phe-
nomenon, sequential usage of various lectins that have
similar effects could be adopted.
cancer immunotherapy with tumor-associated anti-
gens has been debated recently.26,27 our result showing
that mannose-speciﬁc lectin, which bears both immuno-
modulating and autophagy-inducing activity, can have
anti-cancer activities would open up new possibilities for
natural anti-cancer compounds.
acknowledgment: the authors thank drs. n. mi-
zushima and t. yoshimori for providing the gfp-lc3
plasmid, and michel theron for editorial assistance.
references
1. sharon n, lis h. lectins as cell recognition molecules. science 1989;246:
227-234.
2. engering a, geijtenbeek tb, van kooyk y. immune escape through c-
type lectins on dendritic cells. trend immunol 2002;23:480-485.
normal prostate, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and prostatic carcinoma.
glycoconjug j 1999;16:375-382.
5. gorelik e, galili u, raz a. on the role of cell surface carbohydrates and
their binding proteins (lectins) in tumor metastasis. cancer metast rev
2001;20:245-277.
6. abdullaev fi, demejia eg. antitumor effect of plant lectins. nat toxin
1997;5:157-163.
7. stauder h, kreuser ed. mistletoe extracts standardized in terms of mis-
tletoe lectins (ml1) in oncology: current state of clinical research. onkolo-
gie 2002;25:374-380.
8. schumacher k, schneider b, reich g, stiefel t, stoll g, bock pr, et al.
inﬂuence of postoperative complementary treatment with lectin-standard-
ized mistletoe extract on breast cancer patients: a controlled epidemiolog-
ical multicentric retrospective cohort study. anticancer res 2003;23:
5081-5087.
9. zhu ax. hepatocellular carcinoma: are we making progress? cancer invest
2003;21:418-428.
10. varela m, sala m, llovet jm, bruix j. treatment of hepatocellular carci-
noma: is there an optimal strategy? cancer treat rev 2003;29:99-104.
11. tiegs g, hentschel j, wendel a. a t cell-dependent experimental liver injury
in mice inducible by concanavalin a. j clin invest 1992;90:196-203.
12. kaneko y, harada m, kawano t, yamashita m, shibata y, gejyo f, et al.
augmentation of valpha 14 nkt cell-mediated cytotoxicity by interleu-
kin 4 in an autocrine mechanism resulting in the development of con-
canavalin a-induced hepatitis. j exp med 2000;191:105-114.
13. kondo y, kanzawa t, sawaya r, kondo s. the role of autophagy in cancer
development and response to therapy. nat rev cancer 2005;5:726-734.
14. chen wy, cheng wt, lei hy, chang cp, wang cw, chang mc. il-24
inhibits the growth of hepatoma cells in vivo. gene immun 2005;6:493-499.
15. chen sh, hu cp, lee ck, chang cm. immune reactions against hepa-
titis b viral antigens lead to the rejection of hepatocellular carcinoma in
balb/c mice. cancer res 1993;53:4648-4651.
16. kabeya y, mizushima n, ueno t, yamamoto a, kirisako t, noda t, et al.
lc3, a mammalian homologue of yeast apg8p, is localized in autophago-
some membranes after processing. embo j 2000;19:5720-5728.
17. leist m, wendel a. a novel mechanism of murine hepatocyte death in-
ducible by concanavalin a. j hepatol 1996;25:948-959.
18. rodriguez-enriquez s, he l, lemasters jj. role of mitochondrial perme-
ability transition pores in mitochondrial autophagy. int j biochem cell
biol 2004;36:2463-2472.
19. kanzawa t, zhang l, xiao l, germano im, kondo y, kondo s. arsenic
trioxide induces autophagic cell death in malignant glioma cells by upregu-
lation of mitochondrial cell death protein bnip3. oncogene 2005;24:
980-991.
20. reef s, zalckvar e, shifman o, bialik s, sabanay h, oren m, et al. a short
mitochondrial form of p19arf induces autophagy and caspase-indepen-
dent cell death. mol cell 2006;22:463-475.
21. miyagi t, takehara t, tatsumi t, suzuki t, suzuki t, jinushi m, et al.
concanavalin a injection activates intrahepatic innate immune cells to pro-
voke an antitumor effect in murine liver. hepatology 2004;40:1190-1196.
22. chang cp, cheng wc, lei hy. a cellular elisa to screen lectin-like
compounds for cancer cell binding. lett. drug design discov 2005;2:182-
188.
23. mody r, joshi s, chaney w. use of lectins as diagnostic and therapeutic
tools for cancer. j pharmacol toxicol methods 1995;33:1-10.
24. wang h, ng tb, ooi ev, liu wk. effects of lectins with different
carbohydrate-binding speciﬁcities on hepatoma, choriocarcinoma, mela-
noma and osteosarcoma cell lines. int j biochem cell biol 2000;32:365-
372.
25. louis h, moine al, quertinmont e, peny mo, geerts a, goldman m, et
al. repeated concanavalin a challenge in mice induces an interleukin
10-producing phenotype and liver ﬁbrosis. hepatology 2000;31:381-
390.
3. de mejia eg, bradford t, hasler c. the anticarcinogenic potential of
26. rosenberg sa, yang yc, restifo np. cancer immunotherapy: moving
soybean lectin and lunasin. nutr rev 2003;61:239-246.
beyond current vaccines. nat med 2004;10:909-915.
4. arenas mi, romo e, degaspar i, debethencourt fr, sanchez-chapado
m, fraile b, et al. a lectin histochemistry comparative study in human
27. mocellin s, mandruzzato s, bronte v, marincola fm. cancer vaccines:
pessimism in check. nat med 2004;10:1278-1279.