autophagy as an immune defense mechanism
vojo deretic
autophagy is a homeostatic process whereby cytosol or
intracellular organelles are sequestered by a double membrane
structure termed autophagosome for subsequent delivery to
lysosomes and degradation. autophagy takes part in cell
survival and death and has been implicated in development,
aging, neurodegeneration and cancer. the newly discovered
specialized role of autophagy in immune cells expands
autophagic functions to defense against intracellular
pathogens. furthermore, autophagy is involved in acquired
immunity, such as antigen processing for mhc ii presentation,
and is modulated by cytokines such as ifn-g. a further link has
emerged between autophagy and defense against intracellular
pathogens via the immunity-related gtpase lrgm1 (lrg-47),
which has a protective role against mycobacterium
tuberculosis. we propose the term immunophagy for these
defense processes.
addresses
departments of molecular genetics and microbiology, university of new
mexico school of medicine, 915 camino de salud, albuquerque,
nm 87131, usa
corresponding author: deretic, vojo (vderetic@salud.unm.edu)
current opinion in immunology 2006, 18:375–382
this review comes from a themed issue on
host–pathogen interactions
edited by stefan he kaufmann and bruce d walker
available online 19th june 2006
0952-7915/$ – see front matter
# 2006 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
doi 10.1016/j.coi.2006.05.019
introduction
macroautophagy (here referred to as autophagy) is a
cellular homeostatic mechanism [1,2] whereby cells
digest parts of their own cytoplasm for removal or turnover. discrete portions of the cytosol are sequestered into
a characteristic double membrane vacuole, termed the
autophagosome. upon closure of the autophagosome, the
trapped cytosol or organelles are delivered to lysosomes
for degradation (figure 1). in its simplest rendition,
autophagy recycles long-lived cytosolic macromolecules,
such as stable proteins, to support cellular anabolic needs
and viability under starvation conditions [3]. autophagy,
in its housekeeping role, removes damaged or surplus
organelles, including compromised mitochondria, thus
protecting cells from unscheduled apoptosis. although
autophagy is a cell maintenance mechanism, under specific conditions excessive autophagy can cause
www.sciencedirect.com
nonapoptotic programmed cell death [4]. autophagy
has been implicated in cancer, degenerative disorders
such as huntington’s, parkinson’s and alzheimer’s diseases, normal development and aging [1,5]. recent studies demonstrate that autophagy is also an innate
immunity effector against intracellular bacteria and
viruses [6–9]. moreover, autophagy has a strong
impact on mhc ii presentation [9,10,11,12] and is
controlled by cytokines [8,13,14], extending the role of
autophagy to adaptive immunity. we propose the term
immunophagy for the specialized function of autophagy
in immunity. here, we review the fundamentals of autophagy and the specifics of immunophagy.
execution stages of autophagy
following induction, autophagy sequesters a damaged
organelle or a portion of the cytosol into a nascent
autophagosomal structure, called the isolation membrane
or phagophore, which is formed during the initiation stage
(figure 1a). the phagophore is enlarged during the
elongation stage by the addition of new membrane of
undefined origin but suspected to come from the endoplasmic reticulum (er) or a combination of sources
(figure 1b). the isolation membrane eventually seals
to form an autophagosome. an autophagosome is distinguished from the conventional phagosome by the presence of a double delimiting membrane and intralumenal
cytosolic content, including membranes originating from
the captured organelles. the subsequent fusion between
an autophagosome and lysosomes, referred to as flux or
maturation, results in a degradative compartment termed
the autolysosome (figure 1c).
the process of autophagy is conserved from yeast to
mammals. in yeast, the autophagy (atg) factors, counting
now nearly 29 proteins, function as executioners of autophagy [15]. a number of key mammalian atg orthologs
have been identified. for example, yeast atg8, required
for the elongation of autophagic membranes, corresponds
to multiple isoforms of mammalian atg8 (termed lc3a,
b and c), and gabarap, gabarapl1 and gate16.
yeast atg1, which initiates autophagy downstream of the
target of rapamycin (tor) protein, has its equivalent in
drosophila. mammals have two homologs of drosophila
atg1: ulk1 and ulk2 in the mouse and ulk1 and ulk2
in humans. the type iii phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(pi3k) vps34 in yeast (or its hvps34 equivalent in
humans) is required for the production of phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (pi3p) and plays its prime role
during the final stages of fusion with lysosomes (flux or
maturation). the mammalian hvps34 appears to have a
role in signaling upstream of the initiation, according to
current opinion in immunology 2006, 18:375–382
376 host–pathogen interactions
figure 1
autophagy execution stages and key atg factors. (a) initiation is a process where an isolation membrane (phagophore) begins to form. atg1 and a
number of other atg factors initiating this process are under the control of tor (see also figure 2, for the signaling cascade regulating tor).
(b) elongation is characterized by membrane bending and increase in size of the phagophore through addition of membrane, which wraps
around cytoplasmic components, such as organelles, intracellular bacteria or just the cytosol, for degradation of macromolecules (e.g. stable
proteins). (c) maturation (flux) involves fusion of autophagosomes with late endosomes (le), often in the form of multivesicular bodies (mvb) and
lysosomes (lys). lumenal acidification (pink) and lysosomal hydrolasis lead to degradation of the ingested components. two protein–protein
and protein–lipid conjugates, atg5–atg12 (further complexed with atg16) and lc3-ii (lc3-i c-terminally conjugated to phosphatidylethanolamine
[pe]) are associated with and control elongation of the phagophore and autophagosome. lc3 is the best marker of autophagy at present, as it
converts from its lc3-i-nonlipidated form to the pe-conjugated form lc3-ii, a process that can be scored by following translocation from the
cytosol (diffuse fluorescence – left image) to punctate structures (phagophores and autophagosomes – right image). this figure was adapted
from [39].
recent reports [16,17]. in yeast, vps34 also takes part in
the formation of a specialized pre-autophagosomal structure and, thus, most likely affects autophagy initiation
[15]. the hvps34 lipid kinase interacts with beclin 1
(yeast atg6), an autophagy-inducing tumor suppressor
required specifically for the role of hvps34 in autophagic
processes [18]. beclin appears not to be needed for other
processes controlled by hvps34 (i.e. the endosomal–lysosomal pathways) [19,20]. in yeast, two separate protein
current opinion in immunology 2006, 18:375–382
complexes containing vps34 control the autophagic and
endosomal degradative pathways: complex i, consisting of
atg6 (beclin), atg14 and vps34, specializes in autophagy,
whereas complex ii, with vps38 instead of atg14, specializes in endosomal–vacuolar sorting [21]. surprisingly,
equivalents of vps38 or atg14 have not been identified
in mammalian cells. thus, how hvps34 specializes in
autophagosomal versus endosomal pathways [19,20] in
higher organisms is not known.
www.sciencedirect.com
autophagy as an immune defense mechanism deretic 377
autophagy depends on two protein conjugation systems
required for the elongation stage (figure 1b). atg12 is
initially conjugated to atg7, transferred to atg10, and
finally conjugated to atg5. atg5 is essential for autophagy
in the mouse [3]. the atg5–atg12 complex (stabilized
by atg16), localizes to the outer, cytofacial membrane of
the phagophore. parts of this conjugation system are
shared with lc3 (atg8), which undergoes conversion
from unmodified lc3-i to its lipidated form, lc3-ii,
which is c-terminally linked to phosphatidylethanolamine (pe). the lipidated lc3-ii localizes to both the
inside and the outside membranes of a phagophore (figure 1b). lc3 lipidation and lc3-ii association with
autophagosomal membranes provide the basis for two
commonly used assays of autophagy: (i) the lc3-i to
lc3-ii conversion can be monitored by immunoblotting;
and (ii) autophagosome formation can be scored by
immunofluorescence microscopy as a transition of lc3
from its diffuse cytosolic appearance to a membraneassociated, punctate intracellular distribution.
signaling processes regulating autophagy
the execution aspects of autophagy are controlled by the
upstream signal transduction systems. the core signaling
pathway, with factors either inducing or inhibiting autophagy, is depicted in figure 2 (activators are colored in
green and inhibitors in pink). a classical physiological
inducer of autophagy is amino acid starvation, in particular
deprivation of leucine. another signal is absence of growth
factors, which normally authorize cells to take up nutrients
[22]. a pharmacological induction of autophagy is routinely achieved using rapamycin, which targets the ser/thr
kinase tor [23]. tor is a gatekeeper of cellular response to
nutritional conditions and integrates various inputs including growth hormone signals. activation of tor suppresses
autophagy, whereas inactivation of tor promotes autophagy. in yeast, tor negatively regulates atg1, a factor that
sets off the autophagy execution cascade. hence, when
tor is inhibited by rapamcyin, autophagy is induced.
tor is normally regulated by a small gtpase, rheb, which
binds to the n-terminal portion of the tor kinase domain.
as with other small signaling gtpases that act as molecular switches, the gdp-bound form of rheb is in the ‘off’
position, whereas the gtp-bound form is in the ‘on’
position. as illustrated in figure 2, rheb activity is regulated by the gtpase activating protein (gap) tsc1/2,
which receives and integrates various upstream inputs [23]
that come from: (i) growth factor receptor signaling via the
akt/pkb pathway; (ii) energy status via amp-activated
protein kinase (ampk), a kinase that responds to the
amp/atp ratio; (iii) hypoxia via events downstream of
hif1 and through energy depletion and ampk; (iv) dna
damage via p53; and (v) map kinases downstream of ras.
the best understood pathway controlling tsc1/2 is the
one stimulated by growth factors. binding of insulin
www.sciencedirect.com
growth factors to receptors recruits insulin receptor substrates (irs). irs recruit and activate type i pi3k p110/
p85, which generates phosphatidylinositol(3,4,5)p3
(pip3). pip3 recruits pdk1 and akt/pkb to the plasma
membrane, where pdk1 phosphorylates and activates
akt/pkb. active pkb phosphorylates and inactivates
tsc1/2. by inactivating the tsc1/2 gap, this cascade
enhances rheb-gtp-dependent activation of tor and
phosphorylation of tor targets. this, in turn, inhibits
autophagy. if growth factors or amino acids are withheld,
autophagy is augmented. in contrast to type i pi3k
inhibitory effects on autophagy, the execution stages of
autophagy depend on pi3p production on endomembranes, and thus require the type iii pi3k hvps34.
the hvps34 lipid kinase is the target for the well-known
pharmacological inhibitor of autophagy, 3-methyl adenine (3ma). note that 3ma (and another pi3k inhibitor,
wortmannin) inhibits both the upstream (type i) pi3k
and the downstream (type iii) pi3k, but the downstream
kinase (hvps34) dominates the net effect. the same
dominant effect of the terminal positive role of hvps34
explains why the recently reported positive regulation of
tor by hvps34 [16,17] does not contradict the net effect
of 3ma or wortmannin as inhibitors of autophagy. thus,
3ma is invariably used to prove that a given process
involves autophagy.
autophagy as innate immunity mechanism
the concept of autophagic defense against pathogens
harks back to a number of earlier studies indirectly
implicating autophagy in host–pathogen interactions
[2]. a stream of recent publications has uncovered a role
for autophagy in innate immunity [6–8,24,25,26,27].
autophagy eliminates intracellular pathogens in a process
similar to capture and digestion of unwanted or damaged
intracellular organelles. it is now evident that autophagy
serves as a mechanism for the removal of intracellular
bacteria and viruses, together with its primary function as
a cytoplasmic clean-up process.
there are several aspects of autophagy peculiar to the
control of intracellular pathogens, such as the large size of
autophagosomes engulfing intracellular microoganisms.
nevertheless, there are size parallels between lc3dependent clearance of large protein aggregates [28]
and unusually large lc3-positive autophagosomes
engulfing intracellular bacteria [6]. another current
question is whether intracellular pathogens can be subject
to autophagy while remaining intravacuolar [8] or they
have to be in the cytosol [6]. an autophagic enclosure of
a pathogen within a membranous vacuole such as a
phagosome should not represent an obstacle because
autophagy is designed to corral membranous organelles
[1,2]. a related question is whether and how the pathogens, or vacuolar membranes harboring them, are recognized by the autophagic machinery. as of this writing,
potential links between pattern recognition receptors of
current opinion in immunology 2006, 18:375–382
378 host–pathogen interactions
figure 2
signaling pathways activating (green) and inhibiting (pink) autophagy. when the ser/thr kinase tor is active, this inhibits autophagy. when tor
is inactivated (e.g. with rapamycin), this induces autophagy. growth factors or cytokines (e.g. insulin, il-13) activate type i pi3k generating
pip3 on plasma membrane. this, in turn, activates the pdk–akt/pkb axis, which phosphorylates and inhibits tsc2, a subunit of the tsc1–tsc2
heterodimer protein that acts as a gtpase activating protein (gap). tsc1/2 gap regulates the gtp versus gdp bound state of the small
gtpase rheb, a positive regulator of tor. inactivation of tsc2 also occurs via the ras/mapk pathway, with a net result of activating tor.
the inputs inactivating tor include: amp/atp ratios, transduced via ampk phosphorylating tsc2 and, in contrast to pkb, enhancing its gap
activity; hypoxia, acting in a dual fashion via energy depletion and amp/atp ratios and via the hif1 transcriptional factor that activates expression
of products, which act upstream of tsc1/2 to inhibit tor; dna damage; and amino acid starvation, with still unresolved mode of action (dashed
arrows). the proposed sites of amino acid action include tsc1/2, rheb, rheb–tor binding or directly tor, independently of tsc1/2 and rheb
via a direct pathway involving the type iii pi3k hvps34. the pi3k hvps34 generates pi3p and in complex with beclin is needed for the
downstream execution stages of autophagy. pi3k inhibitors, such as 3ma and wortmannin have a net inhibitory effect on autophagy because
they block the most downstream pi3k (hvps34) required during the execution stages of autophagy. this figure was adapted from [39].
innate immunity and stimulation of autophagy have not
been explored. furthermore, if pathogen molecules or
modifications on vacuolar membranes supply homing
cues for autophagy, this could provide the currently
missing information regarding any putative modifications
that might earmark organelles or macromolecules for
autophagy in general.
one interesting detail involves autophagic capture of
shigella mutants that lost proteins involved in the regulation of actin tails used for intracellular motility of the
pathogen [7]. this process has been interpreted as
recognition and stimulation of autophagy by exposure
of an otherwise covered protein epitope. in an alternative
model, intracytoplasmic motility of pathogens such as
current opinion in immunology 2006, 18:375–382
listeria, shigella, rickettsia and possibly the mycobacterial
species that escape the vacuole [29], might represent
an autophagy evasion mechanism. a physical escape
from forming phagophores could be one of the reasons
that lead to the evolution of intracellular movement of
pathogens on actin tails. this interpretation is consistent
with the autophagic capture of nonmotile mutant shigella
[7].
it should also be mentioned that until recently autophagy
was considered to mainly support intracellular survival of
some pathogens [30,31]. it is likely that this paradox is
the result of evolutionary adaptations of pathogens that
have developed protective mechanisms against autophagy or have harnessed this process to their own benefit.
www.sciencedirect.com
autophagy as an immune defense mechanism deretic 379
immunological regulation of autophagy
autophagy and immunity-related gtpases
recent reports suggest that autophagy takes part in
adaptive immunity processes [8,9]. ifn-g induces
autophagy in macrophages [8] and in nonimmune cells
[13,14]. this alone extends the role of autophagy beyond
innate defenses. because ifn-g induces or augments
autophagy, it is appropriate to ask what th2 cytokines
might do. intriguingly, il-4 and il-13 could be antagonists of autophagy because they stimulate type i pi3k
[32], which in turn activates the pkb–tor cascade
(figure 2). incidentally, il-13 was used as a powerful
autophagy inhibitor in the original papers delineating the
autophagy signaling pathways shown in figure 2, before
any context related to infectious disease or immunity
[33,34]. although not much is known about il-4 effects,
of note is that irs phosphorylation (leading to type i
pi3k activation) upon il-13 stimulation also occurs after
il-4 stimulation. thus, th2 cytokines have the potential
to act as suppressors of autophagy. however, tor signaling is very complex (figure 2) and there are reports that
il-4 in hela cells enhances lc3-associated clearance of
large protein aggregates [28]. experimental analyses
carried out specifically in immune cells should address
the hypothesis that th1 and th2 cytokines might affect
autophagy in opposing ways.
thus far, the mechanisms of ifn-g-stimulated autophagy include the ifn-g-inducible, p47 immunity-related
gtpases (irg) [8]. although irg factors were recognized to have a protective role against a variety of intracellular pathogens, it was the work on m. tuberculosis that
eventually led to a connection between irg and autophagy [8]. ifn-g is a marquee antituberculosis immune
mediator and a correlate of immunity against tuberculosis.
the exact nature of antimycobacterial action of ifn-g
has remained an unsolved puzzle, as neither reactive
oxygen nor reactive nitrogen intermediates could explain
in full its potent antimycobacterial action [35]. it has been
shown [35] that ifn-g effects occur, at least in part,
through an irg family member, irgm1 (also known as
lrg-47). according to the standard nomenclature, the
mouse gene is now designated as irgm1 and the closest
human equivalent as irgm [36] (figure 3). before their
connection to autophagy was revealed, the mechanism of
action of irgm1 and other irg proteins was unknown,
although involvement of undefined membrane trafficking
pathways had been implicated [35].
recently published work [8] strongly suggests that
irgm1 participates in ifn-g-dependent induction of
figure 3
immunity-related gtpases in mouse (irg) and man (irg), including murine irgm1 as an inducer (or modulator) of autophagy (or immunophagy).
(a) the 24 mouse irg genes, classified into irga, irgb, irgc, irgd, irgm, and irgq subgroups, are located in clusters on 3 chromosomes (chr 7, 11
and 18). in red letters are murine genes under ifn control. lrg-47 (irgm1) has been implicated in induction (modulation) of autophagy
(immunophagy) induced by ifn-g [8]). designations below the chromosomes denote previously given names to irgm1 (lrg-47), irgm2 (gtpi),
irgm3 (igtp), irga6 (iigp1), irgb6 (tgtp) and irgd (irg-47). two murine pseudogenes, irga5c and irgb7c are marked accordingly (c). (b) the
human genome has only three irg genes (on two chromosomes, 5 and 19). none of the human irg genes appear to be under ifn control;
constitutive expression of irgm has been demonstrated. the irgm gene on the human chromosome 5 is the sole equivalent of the genes
corresponding to the murine clusters on chromosomes 11 and 18. the murine chromosome 11 and 18 regions surrounding the irg genes show
complex syntenic relationship (indicated by line patterns) to the human chromosome 5 encoding the sole human irgm gene. the human irg
genes on chromosome 19 are unambiguously syntenic with the murine genes on the chromosome 7. human irgm contains the rare gms motif
variant within the p-loop of the g-domain (the irgm class gets its name after the m in this motif). based on this and the syntenic relationships,
it is likely that human irgm corresponds to the murine irgm gene. figure created on the basis of the data from ref. [36].
www.sciencedirect.com
current opinion in immunology 2006, 18:375–382
380 host–pathogen interactions
autophagy. the previously underestimated complexity of
the irg family and issues regarding their potential role in
autophagy has recently been uncovered through bioinformatics approaches. the mouse genome has 24 irg genes
[36] located in three clusters on chromosomes 7, 11 and
18 (figure 3). the most complex irg cluster is on chromosome 11, and contains 14 irg genes, with irgm genes
positioned as bookends for the cluster. the three irgm
gene products derive their names from the presence of
the gms sequence within the g1 motif gx4gk(s/t) of
the g protein p loop, which contains the more typical
gks sequence present in the majority of other irgs. the
murine chromosome 18 cluster consists of eight irga1–
irga8 genes. on chromosome 7, there are two genes, irgc
and irgq, with conserved syntenic arrangement across all
mammalian species. irgc and irgq are the only two irg
genes in the mouse genome not controlled by interferon
responsive elements. the previously known murine p47
gtpases are scattered within the clusters on chromosomes 11 and 18: lrg-47 is irgm1, tgtp is irgb6, irg47 is irgd, igtp is irgm3, gtpi is irgm2, and iigp1 is
irga6 (figure 3). compared with the murine genome
replete with irg genes, the human genome appears as a
wasteland, with only three irg genes: irgc, irgq, and
irgm [36] (figure 3). the human irgm gene on
chromosome 5 encodes a shortened version of murine
irgm proteins. it is an n-terminally truncated and cterminally modified version of murine irgm1, with one of
the splice isoforms, irgm(a), being approximately
20 kda in comparison with 47 kda for irgm1 (lrg47). although the irgm1 n-terminus is truncated relative to other irgs, it is still longer than the n-terminus of
ras, exceeding it by over 20 residues. there are five
mapped splice isoforms (a–e) of human irgm, with
various sequences added c-terminally to the partially
truncated g-protein. our unpublished studies suggest
that at least one of these splice isoforms plays a role in
autophagy (singh s and deretic v, unpublished).
autophagy in endogenous pathway of
antigen mhc ii presentation
the role of autophagy in immunity exceeds direct elimination of intracellular pathogens. autophagic digestion
of endogenously synthesized cytosolic proteins enables
their processing for mhc ii presentation [9,10,11,12],
thus connecting autophagy with adaptive immunity
(figure 4). it has been demonstrated [9,10,11] that
autophagy promotes mhc class ii presentation of cytosolic proteins. another form of autophagy, termed chaperone-mediated autophagy (cma) [37], is important for
endogenous mhc ii presentation. cma imports individual cytosolic proteins into the lysosome via a specific
lamp2 isoform (lamp2a), assisted by the hsc70 heat
shock proteins (figure 4b). cma contributes to the
endogenous pathway of cytoplasmic antigen presentation
via mhc ii [38]. macroautophagy and cma are coordinated by an unknown mechanism, with macroautophagy
current opinion in immunology 2006, 18:375–382
figure 4
macroautophagy and chaperone-mediated autophagy in endogenous
pathway of mhc ii antigen presentation. two types of autophagy
promote mhc ii presentation of endogenously synthesized cytosolic
proteins: (a) macroautophagy (see also figure 1) and (b) chaperonemediated autophagy (cma), which functions by importing individual
cytosolic proteins (30% of cytosolic proteins conform with the relaxed
kferq motif/import tag) into the lysosome via a specialized lamp splice
variant (lamp2a) in cooperation with cytosolic and lysosomal hsc70
chaperones. the net effect of both pathways is protein degradation,
mhc ii loading and antigen presentation. often macroautophagy and
cma are coordinated, with the initially induced macroautophagy being
downregulated to prevent excessive degradation and unwanted cell
death, with cma continuing protein degradation without endangering
cell viability.
being supplanted soon upon induction by the more gentle
cma process, lest cells autodigest and die.
conclusions
immunological autophagy (immunophagy) is a budding
new field of investigation that has received a recent boost
from the delineation of the fundamental processes and
factors controlling autophagy in yeast and mammals. the
areas of innate and adaptive immunity will benefit from
understanding the role of immunophagy in defense
against pathogens and antigen processing and presentation. these forms of autophagy, modulated by cytokines
and other physiological inputs, will provide clues
www.sciencedirect.com
autophagy as an immune defense mechanism deretic 381
regarding the effector functions downstream of ifn-g, or,
more generally, th1 versus th2 cytokines, and help
understand previously mysterious actions of immunologically relevant gtpases. the present state of autophagy
research resembles the early stages of the apoptosis field
over a decade ago; it is an important area in its infancy, in
which plenty of discoveries still need to be made, with
immunological aspects being an important leading edge
of current and future developments.
acknowledgements
i thank laboratory members for stimulating exchange of ideas, isabelle
vergne and esteban roberts for comments, and sudha singh for
fluorescence images in figure 1. this work was supported by the national
institutes of health, grants ai45148 and ai42999. this review has been
adapted in part from my recent article [39].
references and recommended reading
papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of
review, have been highlighted as:
 of special interest
 of outstanding interest
1.
shintani t, klionsky dj: autophagy in health and disease:
a double-edged sword. science 2004, 306:990-995.
2.
levine b: eating oneself and uninvited guests; autophagyrelated pathways in cellular defense. cell 2005, 120:159-162.
kuma a, hatano m, matsui m, yamamoto a, nakaya h,
yoshimori t, ohsumi y, tokuhisa t, mizushima n: the role of
autophagy during the early neonatal starvation period.
nature 2004, 432:1032-1036.
the first complete demonstration of a role for an atg factor in autophagy
in mammals using an atg5 knockout mouse.
3.
m. tuberculosis with a previously unknown mode of action, which turned
out to modulate autophagy.
9.

paludan c, schmid d, landthaler m, vockerodt m, kube d,
tuschl t, munz c: endogenous mhc class ii processing
of a viral nuclear antigen after autophagy. science 2005,
307:593-596.
the first publication demonstrating the role of macroautophagy in mhc ii
presentation of endogenously synthesized viral protein. because the
protein in question, ebna1, was a viral product, this also implicated
autophagy in adaptive immunity against intracellular pathogens.
10. dengjel j, schoor o, fischer r, reich m, kraus m, muller m,
kreymborg k, altenberend f, brandenburg j, kalbacher h et al.:
autophagy promotes mhc class ii presentation of peptides
from intracellular source proteins. proc natl acad sci usa
2005, 102:7922-7927.
a demonstration of the role of autophagy in endogenous mhc ii class
antigen processing and presentation. this study also presents a comprehensive analysis of mhc ii bound peptides from cytoplasmic sources
upon induction of autophagy.
11. crotzer vl, blum js: autophagy and intracellular surveillance:
modulating mhc class ii antigen presentation with stress.
proc natl acad sci usa 2005, 102:7779-7780.
12. dorfel d, appel s, grunebach f, weck mm, muller mr, heine a,
brossart p: processing and presentation of hla class i and
ii epitopes by dendritic cells after transfection with in vitrotranscribed muc1 rna. blood 2005, 105:3199-3205.
13. inbal b, bialik s, sabanay i, shani g, kimchi a: dap kinase and
drp-1 mediate membrane blebbing and the formation of
autophagic vesicles during programmed cell death. j cell biol
2002, 157:455-468.
14. pyo jo, jang mh, kwon yk, lee hj, jun ji, woo hn,
cho dh, choi b, lee h, kim jh et al.: essential roles of atg5 and
fadd in autophagic cell death: dissection of autophagic cell
death into vacuole formation and cell death. j biol chem 2005,
280:20722-20729.
15. klionsky dj: the molecular machinery of autophagy:
unanswered questions. j cell sci 2005, 118:7-18.
4.
lum jj, deberardinis rj, thompson cb: autophagy in
metazoans: cell survival in the land of plenty. nat rev mol cell
biol 2005, 6:439-448.
16. byfield mp, murray jt, backer jm: hvps34 is a nutrientregulated lipid kinase required for activation of p70 s6
kinase. j biol chem 2005, 280:33076-33082.
5.
cuervo am: autophagy: many paths to the same end. mol cell
biochem 2004, 263:55-72.
6.

17. nobukuni t, joaquin m, roccio m, dann sg, kim sy, gulati p,
byfield mp, backer jm, natt f, bos jl et al.: amino acids mediate
mtor/raptor signaling through activation of class 3
phosphatidylinositol 3oh-kinase. proc natl acad sci usa 2005,
102:14238-14243.
7.

18. pattingre s, tassa a, qu x, garuti r, liang xh, mizushima n,
 packer m, schneider md, levine b: bcl-2 antiapoptotic
proteins inhibit beclin 1-dependent autophagy. cell 2005,
122:927-939.
a superb study linking autophagy and apoptosis via beclin–bcl-2 interaction. this work is important for our understanding of the coordination
between the two programmed cell death pathways, and also because it
shows a central role of beclin, a subunit of the pi3 kinase hvps34
complex, in the regulation of autophagy.
nakagawa i, amano a, mizushima n, yamamoto a, yamaguchi h,
kamimoto t, nara a, funao j, nakata m, tsuda k et al.:
autophagy defends cells against invading group a
streptococcus. science 2004, 306:1037-1040.
together with [7] and [8], this paper demonstrates the innate defense
role of autophagy against bacterial pathogens. although a typical extracellular pathogen (streptococcus pyogenes) was used, once inside the
host cells, the intracellular streptococci were eliminated by exceptionally
large autophagosomes.
ogawa m, yoshimori t, suzuki t, sagara h, mizushima n,
sasakawa c: escape of intracellular shigella from autophagy.
science 2005, 307:727-731.
together with [6] and [8], this paper demonstrates the innate defense
role of autophagy against bacterial pathogens. shigella normally escapes
from the phagosome into the cytosol. autophagy was proved to be a
cellular mechanism capable of eliminating from the cytosol mutated
bacteria that lost their intracellular motility (i.e. their ability to polymerize
actin and move rapidly on actin tails). in our interpretation, this could be an
indication that the cytosolic motility of pathogens that escape from
vacuoles into the cytosol might be a countermeasure deployed by
bacteria to escape nascent autophagosomes.
8.

gutierrez mg, master ss, singh sb, taylor ga, colombo mi,
deretic v: autophagy is a defense mechanism inhibiting bcg
and mycobacterium tuberculosis survival in infected
macrophages. cell 2004, 119:753-766.
together with [6] and [7], this paper demonstrates the innate defense
role of autophagy against bacterial pathogens. pharmacologically, physiologically or immunologically induced autophagy was active in eliminating intraphagosomal mycobacteria. the immunological induction of
autophagy was achieved by ifn-g, through a process that included irgm1
(lrg-47). irgm1 is an immunity-related gtpasethat protects against
www.sciencedirect.com
19. furuya t, yu j, byfield m, pettingre s, levine b: the
evolutionarily conserved domain of beclin 1 is required for
vps34 binding, autophagy and tumor suppressor function.
autophagy 2005, 1:46-52.
this study shows molecular details of the interactions between beclin and
hvps34 (a pi3 kinase crucial for the execution stages of autophagy). it
also demonstrates a specific role for beclin in autophagy of mammalian
cells and suggests that it might not take part in the generic endosomal–
lysosomal pathway.
20. zeng x, overmeyer jh, maltese wa: functional specificity of the
mammalian beclin–vps34 pi 3-kinase complex in
macroautophagy versus endocytosis and lysosomal enzyme
trafficking. j cell sci 2006, 119:259-270.
21. obara k, sekito t, ohsumi y: assortment of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complexes—atg14p directs
association of complex i to the preautophagosomal
structure in saccharomyces cerevisiae. mol biol cell 2006,
17:1527-1539.
current opinion in immunology 2006, 18:375–382
382 host–pathogen interactions
22. lum jj, bauer de, kong m, harris mh, li c, lindsten t,
thompson cb: growth factor regulation of autophagy and cell
survival in the absence of apoptosis. cell 2005, 120:237-248.
a study demonstrating a cell survival-promoting function of autophagy.
23. wullschleger s, loewith r, hall mn: tor signaling in growth and
metabolism. cell 2006, 124:471-484.
24. rich ka, burkett c, webster p: cytoplasmic bacteria can be
targets for autophagy. cell microbiol 2003, 5:455-468.
25. birmingham cl, smith ac, bakowski ma, yoshimori t,
brumell jh: autophagy controls salmonella infection in
response to damage to the salmonella-containing vacuole.
j biol chem 2006, 281:11374-11383.
a recent report extending a role for autophagy in clearing yet another
intracellular bacterium.
26. de chastellier c, thilo l: cholesterol depletion in
mycobacterium avium-infected macrophages overcomes the
block in phagosome maturation and leads to the reversible
sequestration of viable mycobacteria in phagolysosomederived autophagic vacuoles. cell microbiol 2006, 8:242-256.
a recent report suggesting association of autophagy with another facultative intracellular opportunistic mycobacterial pathogen, m. avium,
although autophagosomes apparently could not eliminate this microorganism. in this case, cholesterol manipulation was used, which might be
related to the reported effects.
27. liu y, schiff m, czymmek k, talloczy z, levine b,
dinesh-kumar sp: autophagy regulates programmed cell
death during the plant innate immune response. cell 2005,
121:567-577.
28. yamamoto a, cremona ml, rothman je: autophagy-mediated
clearance of huntingtin aggregates triggered by the insulinsignaling pathway. j cell biol 2006, 172:719-731.
a study showing large protein aggregate removal by exceptionally large
lc3-positive autophagosomes. these autophagosomes morphologically
resemble the autophagosomes involved in the removal of stretococci that
penetrate into the cytosol [6].
29. stamm lm, pak ma, morisaki jh, snapper sb, rottner k,
lommel s, brown ej: role of the wasp family proteins for
mycobacterium marinum actin tail formation. proc natl acad
sci usa 2005, 102:14837-14842.
autophagosomal machinery by rna viruses. plos biol 2005,
3:e156.
a recent report highlighting the other side of autophagy, in its paradoxical
role of supporting pathogen’s replication in host cells. this reflects
evolutionary adaptations by some viruses and, as shown by others, some
obligate intracellular bacteria.
32. wright k, ward sg, kolios g, westwick j: activation of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase by interleukin-13. an inhibitory
signal for inducible nitric-oxide synthase expression in
epithelial cell line ht-29. j biol chem 1997, 272:12626-12633.
33. arico s, petiot a, bauvy c, dubbelhuis pf, meijer aj, codogno p,
ogier-denis e: the tumor suppressor pten positively
regulates macroautophagy by inhibiting the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase b pathway.
j biol chem 2001, 276:35243-35246.
34. petiot a, ogier-denis e, blommaart ef, meijer aj, codogno p:
distinct classes of phosphatidylinositol 30 -kinases are
involved in signaling pathways that control macroautophagy
in ht-29 cells. j biol chem 2000, 275:992-998.
35. macmicking jd, taylor ga, mckinney jd: immune control of
tuberculosis by ifn-gamma-inducible lrg-47. science 2003,
302:654-659.
36. bekpen c, hunn jp, rohde c, parvanova i, guethlein l, dunn dm,
 glowalla e, leptin m, howard jc: the interferon-inducible p47
(irg) gtpases in vertebrates: loss of the cell autonomous
resistance mechanism in the human lineage. genome biol
2005, 6:r92.
a superb and comprehensive bioinformatics analysis of immunity-related
gtpase (irg)-encoding genes in mammals and lower vertebrates. this
study uncovers the unexpectedly large number of irg genes (22 complete
genes and 2 pseudogenes) in the mouse genome, by far exceeding the
previously studied six irg members. even more surprising, if not shocking,
was the finding that the human genome encodes only three irg genes.
37. cuervo am, stefanis l, fredenburg r, lansbury pt, sulzer d:
impaired degradation of mutant a-synuclein by chaperonemediated autophagy. science 2004, 305:1292-1295.
30. kirkegaard k, taylor mp, jackson wt: cellular autophagy:
surrender, avoidance and subversion by microorganisms.
nat rev microbiol 2004, 2:301-314.
38. zhou d, li p, lin y, lott jm, hislop ad, canaday dh,
brutkiewicz rr, blum js: lamp-2a facilitates mhc class ii
presentation of cytoplasmic antigens. immunity 2005,
22:571-581.
this work demonstrates the role of chaperone-mediated autophagy in
mhc ii presentation of endogenously synthesized cytosolic antigens.
31. jackson wt, giddings th jr, taylor mp, mulinyawe s,
rabinovitch m, kopito rr, kirkegaard k: subversion of cellular
39. deretic v: autophagy in innate and adaptive immunity. trends
immunol 2005, 26:523-528.
agora initiative provides free agriculture journals to developing
countries
the health internetwork access to research initiative (hinari) of the who has launched a new
community scheme with the un food and agriculture organization.
as part of this enterprise, elsevier has given hundreds of journals to access to global online research in
agriculture (agora). more than 100 institutions are now registered for the scheme, which aims to provide
developing countries with free access to vital research that will ultimately help increase crop yields and
encourage agricultural self-sufficiency.
according to the africa university in zimbabwe, agora has been welcomed by both students and staff. "it has
brought a wealth of information to our fingertips", says vimbai hungwe. "the information made available goes a
long way in helping the learning, teaching and research activities within the university. given the economic
hardships we are going through, it couldn’t have come at a better time."
for more information, visit www.aginternetwork.org
current opinion in immunology 2006, 18:375–382
www.sciencedirect.com