nature|vol 441|15 june 2006
news & views
figure 1 | oxygen attack on graphite. li et al.2 show that when oxygen atoms (in red) bind to a graphite
surface, they form two-legged epoxy bridges, which line up to lower their energy. this exerts a
collective tension, breaking the underlying carbon–carbon bonds. structural relaxation around the
emerging ridges results in crumpling of the initially flat graphite sheets. this eases their separation,
giving rise to distorted flakes of graphite, such as the one at the top of the figure. faults along the
oxygen trails lead to further mechanical fractures.
the paper by li et al.2 provides insight into
the atomic-level mechanisms of oxidation in
carbon.  graphite  and  its  artefacts,  such  as 
carbon nanotubes, are materials with a wide
range of uses, from lubrication to electronics.
controlled  oxidative  scission  to  extract
nanoscale graphitic structures (for example,
cut-to-size nanotubes6 or nanosize graphene
sheets7) from larger domains of these materi-
als would be an extremely powerful technique
for all sorts of applications. understanding
how oxygen breaks up the atomic structure of
graphite could lead to a whole new area of
nanotechnology based on nanoscale graphite
origami8.
pulickel m. ajayan is in the department of
materials science and engineering, rensselaer
polytechnic institute, troy, new york 12180, usa.
e-mail: ajayan@rpi.edu
boris i. yakobson is in the department of
mechanical engineering and materials science,
and the department of chemistry, rice
university, houston, texas 77005, usa.
e-mail: biy@rice.edu
1. he, h., klinowski, j., forster, m. & lerf, a. chem. phys. lett.
287, 53–56 (1998).
2. li, j.-l. et al. phys. rev. lett. 96, 176101 (2006).
3. ajayan, p. m. & iijima, s. nature 361, 333–334 (1993).
4. liu, j. et al. science 280, 1253–1257 (1998).
5. dumitrica, t., hua, m. & yakobson, b. i. proc. natl acad. sci.
usa 103, 6105–6109 (2006).
6. ziegler, k. j. et al. j. am. chem. soc. 127, 1541–1547 
7. berger, c. et al. science 312, 1191–1196 (2006).
8. ebbesen, t. w. & hiura, h. adv. mater. 7, 582–586 
(2005).
(1995).
neurodegeneration
good riddance to bad rubbish
daniel j. klionsky
autophagy — cellular ‘self-eating’ — can be induced by stress, but it also
acts continuously in a housekeeping role, disposing of unwanted proteins.
can it protect against neurodegenerative diseases?
alzheimer’s, parkinson’s and huntington’s dis-
eases are names we hear with a certain dread.
these devastating illnesses, typically associated
with ageing, result from the death of neurons.
the cause of cell death is not known, but the
onset of the disease symptoms is often accom-
panied by the appearance of large aggregates of
particular proteins, such as aȋ in alzheimer’s,
ȋ-synuclein in parkinson’s, or huntingtin in
huntington’s disease1. these are normal pro-
teins — everyone has them — although their
function is not always clear. for years, the con-
sensus  theory  has  been  that  the  aggregated 
proteins lead directly to cell death. but perhaps
the cellular housekeeper that should get rid of
the proteins is at fault? there have been hints
that autophagy may have a role in protecting
against neurodegeneration, based on studies
with human cell lines or animals with muta-
tions that predispose them to these diseases1. in
this issue, komatsu et al.2 (page 880) and hara
et al.3 (page 885) provide the first genetic evi-
dence that the housekeeping role of autophagy
is essential for preventing neurodegenerative
disease in healthy animals.
protein aggregates have long been consid-
ered the major culprits in neurodegenerative
disease  because  of  the  linear  correlation
between the age of disease onset and the time
of aggregate appearance. furthermore, certain
mutated forms of the implicated proteins are
more prone to aggregation and/or resistant to
degradation, and result in earlier onset of neu-
rological symptoms. accordingly, many scien-
tists in the field of neurodegeneration have
focused on these mutated proteins and the
accompanying large aggregates or ‘inclusions’
in cells.
cells have several mechanisms to dispose 
of proteins when they misfold, become dam-
aged or are no longer needed. one of the main
degradation  systems  is  the  proteasome,  a 
multi-subunit enzyme that breaks down pro-
teins that have been tagged with ubiquitin. the
proteasome only degrades unfolded, mono-
meric proteins, however, so it cannot handle
protein aggregates. in addition, some of the
mutant neuronal proteins are not good sub-
strates for the proteasome. 
the other principal degradation system is
macroautophagy (which we shall refer to here
as autophagy). the hallmark of this process 
is the formation of double-membrane bubble-
like  ‘vesicles’  that  sequester  portions  of  the 
cell’s cytoplasm and deliver them to an orga-
nelle called the lysosome, where they are broken
down  (fig.  1,  overleaf).  autophagy  can  be
induced by starvation and various hormonal
stimuli4. autophagic vesicles, or autophago-
somes, can engulf entire organelles as well as 
the large aggregates generated by misfolded
neuronal proteins. so, there is potential thera-
peutic value in being able to regulate autophagy
to prevent or ameliorate some diseases. recent
data indicate, however, that the large protein
aggregates are not the toxic species in these 
conditions5,6.  rather,  the  soluble  or  micro-
aggregated forms may be the ones that cause
cell death. what, then, is the role of autophagy,
and its capacity to sequester large structures, in
protecting against neurodegeneration? 
komatsu et al.2 and hara et al.3 have engi-
neered  mice  that  lack  the  atg7 and  atg5
autophagy  genes,  respectively.  both  groups
have used a genetic trick to delete the gene only
from neural cells and only during later stages 
of embryogenesis, in order to bypass develop-
mental defects that would arise from the elimi-
nation  of  the  corresponding  gene  products
constitutively (that is, in all cells throughout
development). in both cases, mice lacking the
autophagy genes develop symptoms of neuro-
degeneration, including neuronal cell death. 
one reason these studies are of such signifi-
cance is that they examine mice that are not
genetically prone to neurodegenerative disease
— the genes encoding the various neuronal
proteins in these mice do not have the muta-
tions associated with early onset of disease
symptoms. these are healthy animals in which
autophagy  cannot  be  acting  as  an  induced
cytoprotective response to damaged proteins.
this  implies  that  the  basal,  housekeeping
 ©2006
nature  publishing group
819
news & views
proteasome
ubiquitin
neuronal
protein
neuronal cell death
neuronal protein
aggregate
induced autophagy
basal autophagy
autophagosome
autolysosome
lysosome
figure 1 | the role of autophagy in protecting against neuronal cell death. certain key neuronal proteins
may misfold. these misfolded proteins can become ubiquitinated (red circles) and degraded by the
proteasome. however, these proteins may be poor substrates for the proteasome, and instead will
accumulate in the cytoplasm, making microaggregates and possibly leading to cell death. basal
autophagy can keep the levels of these proteins low enough to prevent toxic effects by sequestering
them inside autophagosomes that deliver them to the lysosome for subsequent degradation. the
misfolded proteins may also form large aggregates or inclusion bodies that can induce an autophagic
response. these large aggregates may be more protective than harmful.
even though this seems like an uncontrover-
sial statement, there have previously been few
data to support it. basal autophagy may be
particularly vital in neurons, as these cells do
not grow and cannot eliminate waste such as
protein aggregates by cell division. in addition,
nature|vol 441|15 june 2006
the brain typically does not experience a short-
age of nutrients, so autophagy is generally not
induced there as part of a starvation response7.
the  current  studies  therefore  suggest  that
basal autophagy, the routine clearance of the
cytosol,  is  in  fact  crucial  for  maintaining
healthy cells. these papers will shift the focus
of the field of autophagy and neurodegenera-
tion away from large protein aggregates and
induced autophagy.
finally, komatsu et al.2 show that the pro-
teasome functions normally in their experi-
mental  mice;  however,  it  is  obviously  not
capable of handling all waste disposal for the
cell in the absence of autophagy. so why isn’t
autophagy normally just turned on at higher
levels to prevent neurodegeneration prophy-
lactically? unfortunately, too much autophagy
may  cause  other  problems, 
including
autophagic cell death. routine, but limited,
induction of autophagy may have beneficial
effects,  particularly  in  individuals  who  are
prone to certain neurodegenerative diseases,
but additional studies will be needed to deter-
mine whether this is the case.
daniel j. klionsky is in the life sciences institute,
department of molecular, cellular and
developmental biology, and the department of
biological chemistry, university of michigan, 
ann arbor, michigan 48109, usa. 
e-mail: klionsky@umich.edu
1. rubinsztein, d. c. et al. autophagy 1, 11–22 (2005).
2. komatsu, m. et al. nature 441, 880–884 (2006).
3. hara, t. et al. nature 441, 885–889 (2006).
4. levine, b. & klionsky, d. j. dev. cell 6, 463–477 (2004).
5. arrasate, m., mitra, s., schweitzer, e. s., segal, m. r. &
finkbeiner, s. nature 431, 805–810 (2004).
6. tanaka, m. et al. j. biol. chem. 279, 4625–4631 (2004).
7. mizushima, n., yamamoto, a., matsui, m., yoshimori, t. &
ohsumi, y. mol. biol. cell 15, 1101–1111 (2004).
function of autophagy is involved in prevent-
ing neurodegeneration. 
the previous focus on the role of autophagy
in removing large protein aggregates resulted
in part from the emphasis on studying patients
or animal models with genetic mutations that
predisposed the individual to neurodegenera-
tion.  in  these  cases,  autophagy  might  be
induced, but its cytoprotective effect could be
limited because these large aggregates are not
toxic, or are not the initial toxic form. the
large  aggregates  highlighted  by  studies  of
mutant proteins may actually be a relatively
terminal state of neurodegeneration, rather
than the crucial intermediate that leads to dis-
ease onset, and where therapeutic intervention
may be most effective.
loss of autophagy in the mice engineered by
komatsu et al.2 and hara et al.3 also eventually
leads  to  the  formation  of  inclusion  bodies
analogous to those seen in neurodegeneration.
but the initial result of the loss of the atg genes
was accumulation of diffuse ubiquitinated pro-
teins in the cytoplasm of the neural cells; the
large inclusion bodies were seen later2. one
implication of this is that everyone, even people
without genetic mutations that promote the 
formation of the large protein aggregates, is
potentially susceptible to neurodegenerative
disease,  and  autophagy  is  a  key  protective
mechanism in otherwise healthy individuals.
as hara et al.3 put it, “a low level of constitu-
tive autophagy must be important for intracel-
lular  clearance  under  normal  conditions.”
quantum physics
united through repulsion
leonardo fallani and massimo inguscio
mutually repulsive atoms placed at periodic intervals in a ‘crystal of light’
can, counterintuitively, be forced into stable couplings. that theoretical
prediction has just seen experimental confirmation. 
nature likes to save energy. whenever inde-
pendent particles can arrange themselves freely,
they choose the configuration that minimizes
their total energy. that’s why a molecule can be
formed from two or more atoms: the bound
configuration is stable because the total energy
of the atoms is smaller when they are close
together than when they are far apart. on page
853 of this issue, winkler et al.1 report a funda-
mental extension to this concept of a molecule
— atom pairs bound together through repul-
sive, rather than attractive, forces. 
it seems intuitive that, to obtain a bound sys-
tem of particles, an attractive force between
them is required. but it is also easy to see that
attraction by itself is not sufficient: to reach an
equilibrium  configuration,  a  repulsive  force
must  also  be  present,  or  the  system  would 
simply collapse. this phenomenon is quite gen-
eral in astrophysics, for example, certain types
of supernovae are the results of implosions that
occur when a star’s self-gravity is no longer bal-
anced by the pressure generated by thermonu-
clear reactions in its core. stable stars, on the
other hand, exist when some repulsive force
counterbalances the attraction of gravity. in a
neutron star, this repulsion is provided by the
rules  of  quantum  mechanics,  which  forbid 
820
 ©2006
nature  publishing group