biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864 – 1884
www.elsevier.com/locate/bbamem
review
ceramides and other bioactive sphingolipid backbones in health and disease:
lipidomic analysis, metabolism and roles in membrane structure,
dynamics, signaling and autophagy
wenjing zheng a, jessica kollmeyer a, holly symolon a, amin momin a, elizabeth munter a,
elaine wang a, samuel kelly a, jeremy c. allegood a, ying liu a, qiong peng a, harsha ramaraju a,
m. cameron sullards a, myles cabot b, alfred h. merrill jr. a,⁎
a school of biology, chemistry and biochemistry and the petit institute of bioengineering and bioscience, georgia institute of technology, atlanta,
b the john wayne cancer institute, saint john’s health center, santa monica, ca 90404, usa
ga 30332-0230, usa
received 27 july 2006; accepted 16 august 2006
available online 22 august 2006
abstract
sphingolipids are comprised of a backbone sphingoid base that may be phosphorylated, acylated, glycosylated, bridged to various headgroups
through phosphodiester linkages, or otherwise modified. organisms usually contain large numbers of sphingolipid subspecies and knowledge
about the types and amounts is imperative because they influence membrane structure, interactions with the extracellular matrix and neighboring
cells, vesicular traffic and the formation of specialized structures such as phagosomes and autophagosomes, as well as participate in intracellular
and extracellular signaling. fortunately, “sphingolipidomic” analysis is becoming feasible (at least for important subsets such as all of the
backbone “signaling” subspecies: ceramides, ceramide 1-phosphates, sphingoid bases, sphingoid base 1-phosphates, inter alia) using mass
spectrometry, and these profiles are revealing many surprises, such as that under certain conditions cells contain significant amounts of “unusual”
species: n-mono-, di-, and tri-methyl-sphingoid bases (including n,n-dimethylsphingosine); 3-ketodihydroceramides; n-acetyl-sphingoid bases
(c2-ceramides); and dihydroceramides, in the latter case, in very high proportions when cells are treated with the anticancer drug fenretinide (4-
hydroxyphenylretinamide). the elevation of dhceramides by fenretinide is befuddling because the 4,5-trans-double bond of ceramide has been
thought to be required for biological activity; however, dhceramides induce autophagy and may be important in the regulation of this important
cellular process. the complexity of the sphingolipidome is hard to imagine, but one hopes that, when partnered with other systems biology
approaches, the causes and consequences of the complexity will explain how these intriguing compounds are involved in almost every aspect of
cell behavior and the malfunctions of many diseases.
© 2006 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.
keywords: sphingolipidomics; lipidomics; signaling; autophagy; disease; cancer
abbreviations: 3ksa, 3-ketosphinganine; 3ksr, 3-ketosphinganine reductase; 4hpr, n-(4-hydroxyphenyl) retinamide; asmase, acid sphingomyelinase;
bsmase, alkaline sphingomyelinase; c2-cer, n-acetylsphingosine; cer, ceramide; cer1p, ceramide 1-phosphate; cerk, ceramide kinase; cert, ceramide
transporter; cgalt, udp-galactose:ceramide galactosyltransferase; cglct, udp-glucose:ceramide glucosyltransferase; des, dihydroceramide desaturase(s); dhcer,
dihydroceramide; esi, electrospray; galcer, galactosylceramide; gfp, green fluorescent protein; glccer, glucosylceramide; lc, liquid chromatography; lc3,
microtubule-associated protein light chain 3; ms, mass spectrometry; ms/ms and msn, tandem mass spectrometry; nbd-cer, n-[6-(7-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazol-4-
yl)amino]hexanoylceramide, nbd-cer; nsmase, neutral sphingomyelinase; paf, platelet-activating factor; pdk1, 3-phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1; phyto-,
phytosphingosine containing; pi3k, phosphoinositide-3-kinase; pka, protein kinase a; pkc, protein kinase c; pp1, phosphoprotein phosphatases 1; pp2a,
phosphoprotein phosphatases 2a; q, quadrupole, q; s1p, sphingosine-1-phosphate; s1pp, sphingosine-1-phosphate phosphatase; sa, sphinganine; sa1p, sphinganine
1-phosphate; sdk1, sphingosine-dependent kinase 1; sm, sphingomyelin; smase, sphingomyelinase; sms, sphingomyelin synthase; sphk, sphingosine kinase(s);
spl, sphingosine 1-phosphate lyase; spt, serine palmitoyltransferase; tnf, tumor necrosis factor
⁎ corresponding author. tel.: +1 404 385 2842; fax: +1 404 385 2917.
e-mail address: al.merrill@biology.gatech.edu (a.h. merrill).
0005-2736/$ - see front matter © 2006 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.bbamem.2006.08.009
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
contents
1.
2.
3.
4.1.
4.2.
ceramide turnover to sphingosine .
sphingosine metabolism .
4. removal of ceramide by hydrolysis or incorporation into other sphingolipids .
5. removal of ceramide by metabolism to more complex sphingolipids .
5.1.
5.2.
5.3. glucosylceramides and galactosylceramides.
5.4. other ceramide metabolites .
subcellular localization of sphingolipid biosynthesis and turnover .
6.
7. biological activities of the lipid backbones of sphingolipids .
sphingomyelins .
ceramide-1-phosphates .
sphingoid bases .
ceramides .
structures and properties of the lipid backbone(s) of sphingolipids .
1.1.
1.2.
lipidomic analysis of sphingolipids .
formation of the lipid backbones of sphingolipids .
3.1.
(dihydro)ceramide synthase(s)
3.2. dihydroceramide desaturase(s)
formation of long-chain ceramide from exogenous short-chain ceramide .
3.2.1. generation of ceramide by the reverse reaction of ceramidase .
3.2.2. generation of c2-ceramide by platelet-activating factor (paf)-dependent transacetylase .
3.2.3. generation of ceramide by turnover of complex sphingolipids .
3.2.4.
sphingosine, other sphingoid bases and sphingoid base 1-phosphates as bioactive species .
ceramides and cer1p as bioactive species .
phosphoprotein phosphatases 1 and 2a .
protein kinase c (pkc) .
cathepsin d .
possible mechanisms for cer and dhcer induced autophagy.
7.1.
7.2.
7.3.
7.4.
7.5.
7.6. other possible targets of cer .
7.7. dhcer as bioactive species? .
sphingolipids and autophagy .
8.1.
summarizing comments .
9.
acknowledgements .
references .
8.
1865
. 1866
. 1866
. 1868
. 1868
. 1870
. 1871
. 1872
. 1872
. 1872
. 1872
. 1873
. 1873
. 1873
. 1873
. 1873
. 1873
. 1873
. 1873
. 1874
. 1874
. 1874
. 1874
. 1875
. 1875
. 1876
. 1876
. 1876
. 1876
. 1877
. 1878
. 1879
. 1879
. 1880
j. l. w. thudichum wrote in 1876 that through chemistry
one could understand “…the nature of evils in the shape of
disease, and the means of curing or mitigating them” [1] and
soon thereafter, in his classic treatise the chemistry of the
brain [2], described an enigmatic compound he named
“sphingosin.” within a century,
the chemical structures of
thousands of individual sphingolipids (as the category was
later named by herb carter) [3] had been elucidated [4],1 and
a substantial fraction of these compounds were known to be
involved in diseases due to defective sphingolipid turnover
(niemann–pick disease, gaucher, etc.) [4–6] (for discussion
of the diseases involving acid ceramidase, see the review by
schuchman and coworkers in this monograph)
[7]. soon
thereafter, the first successes in treatment were underway [8].
by the end of
the twentieth century, sphingolipids were
known to be involved in essentially all aspects of cell
regulation as well as almost every type of disease. for
examples, phospho- and glyco-sphingolipids are the binding
1 a compilation of most of the known species in a working model for the
biosynthetic pathway is available at www.sphingomap.org.
the toxicity,
targets for a large number of bacteria, bacterial toxins, and
viruses [9] (see also the review by gulbins and coworkers in
this monograph) [10]; disruption of de novo sphingolipid
biosynthesis accounts for
teratogenicity and
fumonisins, which are common food
carcinogenicity of
contaminants in many parts of the world (in addition,
the
finding that fumonisins inhibit ceramide synthase was the first
discovery of diseases caused by disruption of sphingolipid
biosynthesis) [11,12]; abnormalities in one subunit of serine
palmitoyltransferase (sptlc1) cause hereditary sensory
neuropathy type 1 (hsn1) (which represents the first human
genetic disease to be attributed to mutation in a gene for
[13,14]; many categories of
sphingolipid biosynthesis)
sphingolipids have long been known to be abnormal
in
cancer [15] and are now known to participate in many of the
mechanisms used by cells to coordinate signals from the
external environment with cell division and survival [16,17]—
furthermore,
they have been shown in vivo to be orally
chemopreventive in experimental animals [18–20], appear to
have chemotherapeutic potential in human clinical trials [21],
and may even provide new strategies for immunotherapy [22–
1866
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
functions at multiple levels, and it
24] (for more information on sphingolipids and cancer, also
see the reviews in this monograph by levade and co-workers
and ghidoni et al.) [25,26]; many categories of sphingolipids
are also being implicated in cardiovascular disease [27],
diabetes and the so-called lipotoxicity [28], alzheimer's
disease [29–32] and many others too numerous to list here
(for recent reviews, see [33] and other chapters in this recent
book on sphingolipid biology as well as in this monograph).
there is,
indeed, an evolving field of sphingolipid-based
therapeutics [34]. a challenge for this field is to find clear
paths through the complex mechanisms and sometime
contradictory findings due at least in part to the large number
of structurally and metabolically interrelated bioactive species.
to complicate matters further, sphingolipids are engaged in
biological
is not
implausible for the following sequelae of events to occur:
(i) in the basal state (which may be defined as the state
immediately before addition of an agonist or toxic challenge,
or as a selected starting point for a progressive biological
event, such as the cell cycle), an ensemble of membrane
sphingolipids will be present in a particular region of, say, the
plasma membrane where they help define the physical
the membrane and possibly interact with
properties of
proteins in that membrane,
the extracellular matrix or
neighboring cells; (ii) in response to receptor activation or
other stimulus, the sphingolipid composition may change due
to addition,
the
membrane architecture with respect
to the mobility, con-
formation and/or composition of the other proteins and lipids,
and (iv) producing sphingolipid metabolites that may serve as
second messengers to activate or inhibit specific downstream
targets.
the
metabolites may promote major changes in membrane
morphology such as the formation of phagosomes, autopha-
gosomes and other specialized structures, which can also have
if asked
both structural and signaling components. thus,
whether changes
signaling or
the answer would be “both.” it
membrane reorganization,
would be useful to have a single term, perhaps “sphingaling,”
for the entire spectrum of mechanisms whereby sphingolipids
influence cell behavior.
removal or metabolism, altering (iii)
in the course of
these changes, some of
in sphingolipids
reflect
while there are many views about where one might begin to
study such a complex subject, an approach favored by
thudichum was to “…proceed by a severe process, that of
analysis, for nothing less than the results of analysis of work
done can establish as proved what many feel as a sentiment….”
[1]. and he also considered this to be the approach that would
ultimately result in a better understanding of disease: “the
reader will thus be better able to appreciate the reasons which
have caused me to give so much attention to the chemolysis of
the principles extracted from the brain, and to surmise the
grounds which influence me not to coincide with those who
propose to avoid this laborious effort, and to carry on research
by a kind of fishing for supposed disease-poisons, of which,
according to my view of the subject, the attempt of the boy to
catch a whale in his mother's washing-tub is an appropriate
parabole.” [2].
in this millennium, thudichum's approach would be called
“systems biology” with investigators approaching biology using
the tools of genomics, proteomics, metabolomics, lipidomics and
all of the other “omics” at their disposal. therefore, this review is
written from the perspective of emerging “sphingolipidomic”
technologies, and attempts to overlay what these methods can
conveniently measure thus far (mostly the lipid backbones and a
few of the complex species) within a framework of knowledge
about the metabolism and function of these molecules. it will
also highlight what are likely to be the first deliverables of
sphingolipidomic approaches, which are the surprises that fall
outside of the scope of the original hypothesis—which in some
cases may even cause a change of paradigm.
1. structures and properties of the lipid backbone(s) of
sphingolipids
although the names and structures of the lipid backbones of
sphingolipids are now generally known, as more investigators
have entered this field and expanded the types of organisms that
are studied, the likelihood of encountering the same term for
different molecular species has also increased (for example,
“sphingosine” from most mammalian sphingolipids will be
comprised mainly of an 18-carbon alkyl chain whereas that
from fruit flies has primarily 14 carbons) [35]. thus, there is a
growing need for greater clarity in defining the specific
compounds that have been analyzed and a more standardized
nomenclature [36].
1.1. sphingoid bases
sphingolipids are defined by the presence of a backbone
sphingoid base (i.e., a 2-aminoalk[ane or ene]1,3-diol with
2s,3r stereochemistry), which can be distinguished by chain
length, number of double bonds, and whether or not there are
additional hydroxyls by the nomenclature described in the
legend to fig. 1. although different organisms can display
considerable variation in the sphingoid base backbone [37],
there are usually only a few structural variants in any one
species;
for example, humans have primarily sphingosine
(d18:1) (often abbreviated “so”), sphinganine (d18:0) (often
abbreviated “sa” or “dhso” for dihydrosphingosine) and
4-hydroxysphinganine (t18:0) (often abbreviated “phyto” for
phytosphingosine, an old name for this compound) (fig. 1) plus
small amounts of the longer chain length homologs d20:1 and
d20:0 and in skin, 6-hydroxy-sphingosine (6-t18:1). in contrast,
insects often contain sphingoid bases with a shorter alkyl-chain
length (14 and 16 carbons) [35] and plants have sphingoid bases
with the double bonds in additional positions along the alkyl
chain [38] (fig. 1).
one of the distinctive features of sphingoid bases is that they
bear a net positive charge at neutral ph, which is rare among
naturally occurring lipids [39], and with aqueous solubilities
>1 μm,
they can relatively easily move among different
membranes [40]. however, it should also be borne in mind that
the pka of the amino group (7 and 8) is lower than usually
found in simple amines [41] (due in part to intramolecular
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
1867
fig. 1. structures of representative sphingolipids. the abbreviations are gal, galactose; glc, glucose; p, phosphate; d18:1, dihydroxysphingoid base with 18 carbons
and one double bond; t18:0, trihydroxysphingoid base with no double bonds (phytosphingosine), etc.
therefore, a substantial
hydrogen bonding),
fraction is
uncharged and able to move across membrane bilayers, as
schematically depicted in fig. 2. likewise, they can become
trapped in vesicles that have an acidic ph [42], and under some
conditions so can act as a lysosomotrophic agent
[43].
sphingoid bases are also bound by albumin, and are usually
administered to cells as a 1:1 (mol:mol) complex to solubilize
the sphingoid base as well as serve as “buffer” the detergent
effects [44]. for more information about biophysical considera-
tions for sphingoid bases and ceramides, the reader is referred to
fig. 2. schematic representation of some aspects of sphingolipid dynamics in cells. the diagram shows the fate of sphingolipids made de novo in the endoplasmic
reticulum (er) from serine and palmitoyl-coa by serine palmitoyltransferase (spt) to sphinganine (sa), and formation of dihydroceramide (dhcer) by ceramide
synthases (cs) and desaturation of dhcer to cer by dhcer desaturase (des). this is followed by trafficking to and through the golgi, where sphingomyelin (sm)
and most glycosphingolipids (gsl) are made and delivered to the plasma membrane (pm); alternatively, the (dh)cer (and possibly other sphingolipids) may be
incorporated into other intracellular compartments such as mitochondria or autophagosomes. also shown is synthesis of galactosylceramide (galcer) in the lumen of
the er and synthesis of sphingomyelin (sm) in the pm by sm synthase (sms), as well as sm turnover via sphingomyelinases (smase) to cer as well as the
downstream metabolites sphingosine (so) and sphingosine 1-phosphate (sop). the turnover of sphingolipids (including both long-chain and short-chain cer) occurs in
several intracellular locations, but for simplicity, the production in the pm and vesicles such as lysosomes are shown to illustrate how the products can be recycled,
degraded, or in the case of sop, secreted from the cell.
1868
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
the review by f.m. goñi and a. alonso in this monograph [45],
and for more complex sphingolipids, the review by b. maggio
[46].
phosphorylation of so increases the polarity considerably
although it is nonetheless difficult to prepare solutions of s1p
because the charge is internally neutralized as the zwitterion;
therefore, it is helpful to consult the technical literature when
using this compound (http://www.avantilipids.com/synthetic-
sphingosine-1-phosphate.asp). n-methyl-derivatives have also
been reported but rarely [47], however, in this report, we will
describe a situation where they have been found in cells using
mass spectrometry.
1.2. ceramides
the term ceramide (cer) is often used specifically for n-
acylsphingosines, which is the preferred practice, however,
when investigators use a method that does not distinguish
among backbone species (such as analysis by thin-layer
chromatography under most conditions, or the diglyceride
kinase assay), the term will likely include all n-acyl-sphingoid
bases, regardless of the backbone. the terms “dihydrocera-
mide” (dhcer) and “phytoceramide” (phytocer) are often used
to designate “ceramides” with these other backbones (i.e., n-
acyl-sphinganines and n-acyl-4-hydroxysphinganine, respec-
tively), and when the fatty acyl chain length is specified, this is
often shown by the carbon number before the name, such as
c16-cer for n-palmitoyl-sphingosine. here, too, it is helpful to
use the shorthand nomenclature suggested by the lipid maps
consortium [36] where ceramides would have a d18:1 back-
bone, dihydroceramides would have d18:0, etc. and the amide
linked fatty acids can also be designated by this nomenclature
(e.g., n-palmitoylsphingosine would be d18:0/16:0).
the fatty acids are typically 16 to 26 carbon atoms in
length (with shorter and longer species being found under
special conditions, for example, the water barrier of skin has a
30-carbon, ω-hydroxyl fatty acid) and mostly saturated, with
the most common unsaturated species in mammals being
nervonic acid (fig. 1). the ceramides of skin, epithelial cells,
and other sources (such as plants) often have α-hydroxy-fatty
acids (fig. 1).
since both alkyl chains of most ceramides are saturated, the
phase transition temperatures of sphingolipids are usually
quite high, typically >37°. naturally occurring ceramides are
highly hydrophobic and essentially insoluble in aqueous
medium (cmc <10− 10 m). when studies require the delivery
of ceramides to enzyme assays or cells, this water-insolubility
is often circumvented using detergents or liposomes, organic
solvents (e.g., ethanol and dodecane, 98:2), or short-chain
analogs (such as n-acetylsphingosine, c2-cer,
through n-
octanoylsphingosine, c8-cer) [44]. use of these analogs is
informative, but
the short-chain cer have very different
biophysical properties than the natural species [48]; further-
more, when added to cells, the short-chain fatty acid may be
removed and replaced with a long-chain fatty acid [49] as
depicted schematically in fig. 2 (although this changes the
molecular species, the products are ceramides with a more
physiological composition). also useful are fluorescent
analogs, such as n-[6-(7-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazol-4-yl)
amino]hexanoylceramide (nbd-cer) that are readily taken
up by cells and have proven very useful
in studies of
sphingolipid transport and metabolism because the nbd-fatty
acid is not recycled into other lipid classes [50]. nbd-dhcer
is also desaturated and can serve as an in situ substrate for
dhcer desaturase [51].
although the aqueous solubility of long-chain cer is low,
they can nonetheless be considered as amphiphiles because the
hydroxyl group at the first carbon and the amide bond are
hydrophilic moieties [48,52]. some of the biological responses
to cer generation are probably due to their influence on the
structure of membrane rafts and caveolae, promotion of the
membrane curvature, and induction of membrane “leakiness” to
aqueous solutes (which has been proposed to play a role in
release of pro-apoptotic mediators from mitochondria) [53,54].
one would additionally predict that production of cer could be
used to promote membrane curvature by trapping of the cer on
one leaflet by phosphorylation, which may be how this
metabolite participates in phagocytosis [55]. ceramide 1-
phosphate also plays a major role in cell signaling [56].
addition of headgroups to produce sphingomyelins (sm),
glycosphingolipids, and 1-o-acylceramides also changes the
properties; however, a discussion of more complex sphingoli-
pids falls outside the scope of this review.
2. lipidomic analysis of sphingolipids
a lipidomic analysis would be defined as “sphingolipido-
mic” analysis if it determines all of the molecular species of
sphingolipids, which for mammals probably numbers in the tens
of thousands considering that there are over 400 headgroup
variants, at least a half dozen sphingoid bases (if one includes
minor species) and in most sphingolipids, about a dozen major
fatty acid variants. hence, currently available
and minor
methods are able to analyze only subsets of
the full
sphingolipidome [57–59]. fortunately, this includes at least
one approach (liquid chromatography, electrospray tandem
mass spectrometry, lc esi ms/ms)
is capable of
providing structure specific and quantitative analysis of all of
the “signaling” backbone species (cer and cer 1-phosphates,
sphingoid base and sphingoid base 1-phosphates and others)
[57,58]).
that
mass spectrometry has been applied to sphingolipids for at
least four decades using many ionization methods, including
maldi and electrospray (esi), and mass analyzers, such as
sectors, quadrupoles (q), time-of flight (tof), ion traps and
fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance (ft-icr)
(for
primary references to these methods see the reviews cited
above). some of the advantages of mass spectrometry are that it
provides:
(a) a high level of specificity with regard to
identification of complex compounds via molecular mass,
especially when analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (ms/
ms and msn modes); (b) levels of sensitivity that are orders of
magnitude lower than classical techniques, so compounds can
be detected even if they are present in attamol to fmol amounts
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
1869
(usually analyzed with ∼106 cells or even fewer); (c) a signal
response can be correlated to analyte concentration provided
there are appropriately matched internal standards to normalize
for differences in ionization and fragmentation of individual
molecular species; and (d) a dynamic range of several orders of
magnitude for some forms of ms/ms, which allows analysis of
compounds that vary in abundance over this same range in
biological samples (for example,
typically high abundance
sphingolipids such as sphingomyelins versus signaling meta-
bolites). to achieve these goals, a number of decisions
regarding the handling of the samples (both extraction methods
and separation of isomeric and isobaric species prior to mass
spectrometry), internal standards, ionization technique, instru-
ment, and mass spectrometry scanning method must be made
judiciously.
the success of mass spectrometric analyses fundamentally
depends on the gas phase chemistry of the compounds of
interest and whether or not they produce ions that are useful
as unique and sensitive identifiers for the individual species.
in this regard, sphingolipids have proven to be particularly
amenable to mass spectrometric analyses because they are
relatively easily ionized, and many fragment to products that
are characteristic for the headgroup and backbone subclasses
[58]
(fig. 3). for examples, both long-chain bases and
complex sphingolipids readily ionize via positive ion esi to
form primarily (m + h)+ ions, and sphingoid base-1-phos-
phates, sm, sulfatides, and gangliosides may also form
(m–h)− ions via negative ion esi. furthermore,
the
fragmentation profiles for both sphingoid bases and many
complex sphingolipids (figs. 1 and 3) provide information
about the headgroups and types of sphingoid bases and fatty
acids in the backbones. however, when fragmentation leaves
the ion on the headgroup rather than the ceramide backbone
(as occurs with sm,
for example), only the overall
composition of the backbone is determined, not the nature
of the individual components, unless newer techniques are
used (m. cameron sullards, personal communication). to
deal with the complexity of the compounds that are being
analyzed (especially for the higher order glycosphingolipids)
and, hence, the potential number of fragments, a systematic
nomenclature has been developed which describes these
fingerprint fragmentations [60–63].
as part of
its goal of developing mass spectrometric
methods that will eventually allow analysis of the entire
lipidome, the lipid maps consortium (www.lipidmaps.org)
has developed extraction protocols, mass spectrometric
methods using esi and both triple quadrupole and hybrid
quadrupole-ion trap instruments, and internal standards (which
have recently been made available for purchase by avanti
polar lipids, alabaster, al)
for analysis of mammalian
sphingolipids up to mono- and usually di-hexosylceramides
(for sphingolipids, these have been published [58], but will
continue to undergo refinement). at present, the published
methods are able to analyze all of the species shown in fig. 4
as well as compounds such as lysosphingomyelin, psychosine
and n-methylsphingoid bases.
fig. 3. major routes of dissociation of sphingolipids. for sphingoid bases and most derivatives, including sphingoid base 1-phosphates, ceramides, ceramide 1-
phosphates, and glycosphingolipids, although for the latter, glycosidic bond cleavage usually predominates and cleavage of the ceramide backbone is achieved in ms/
ms/ms (and other msn) modes. note that the nature of the sphingoid base (sphingosine vs. sphinganine vs. 4-hydroxysphinganine can be deduced from the m/z of the
fragmentation product, although this is often confirmed by an independent method such as mobility on liquid chromatography. also shown (lower right) are examples
of headgroup cleavage sites in complex glycosphingolipids and the nomenclature used to describe the cleavages. capital letters are used to label cleavages where the
charge is retained on the fragment starting from the carbohydrate end of the compound (a, b, c…) versus cleavages where the charge is retained on the fragment with
the ceramide backbone (…x, y, z).
1870
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
3. formation of the lipid backbones of sphingolipids
biosynthesis of the lipid backbone of sphingolipids is not
only important to form the lipid “anchor” for the more complex
downstream products [64–67], but also because many of the
biosynthetic intermediates are highly bioactive and can affect
cell behavior (and when disrupted, result in disease) [64–67].
de novo begins with the condensation of serine and a fatty
acyl-coa (e.g., palmitoyl-coa for ceramides with an 18-carbon
sphingoid base backbone) by serine palmitoyltransferase (spt)
[68] to form 3-ketosphinganine (3ksa), followed by reduction
of 3ksa to sphinganine (sa), which is then n-acylated to
dhcer and (in most cases) desaturated to cer in the endo-
plasmic reticulum [69,70] as shown in figs. 2 and 4 (cer can
also be made by recycling of so, as also shown).
serine palmitoyltransferase (spt) belongs to a family of
pyridoxal 5′-phosphate (plp)-dependent α-oxoamine synthases
[71] that are, in most cases, soluble homodimers, whereas spt is
(in most species) a membrane-bound heterodimer (with the
known exception being the spt from sphingomonas paucimo-
bilis) [72]. in mammals, two gene products (sptlc1 and
sptlc2) are necessary for spt activity, whereas in yeast a third
subunit has been found [73]. human sptlc1 and sptlc2 have
∼20% identity, and the sptlc2 subunit has a conserved lysine
residue in a consensus pyridoxal phosphate-binding motif [71]
that is lacking in sptlc1 [74] which implies that spt has only
one catalytic active site. missense mutations of sptlc1 that are
at
the interface of the sptlc1/sptlc2 and close to the
presumed active site lysine of sptlc2 [75] have been linked to
the most common hereditary sensory neuropathy type i (hsn1)
[13,14]. both components of the spt heterodimer are required
for activity, and expression of each subunit has been found to
affect the amounts of the other, even in mice with reduced
expression of one of the subunits [76].
spt activity can be regulated transcriptionally and post-
transcriptionally. both positive and negative regulation at a
transcriptional level has been seen with a number of agents,
including endotoxin and cytokines [77], uvb irradiation
[78], and other agents [79]. certain types of synthetic and
naturally occurring agents change spt activity with no effect
on spt mrna amount,
retinoic acid [80],
[81], etoposide [82], and n-(4-hydroxyphenyl)
resveratrol
retinamide (4-hpr) [83]. a major regulator of activity is the
supply of
the substrates, serine and palmitate [84]. spt
appears also to be regulated by s1p, although the mechanism
is not known [85].
such as
3-ketosphinganine reductase (3ksr) is located in the er
with the active site facing the cytosolic side [86]. the gene
fig. 4. de novo sphingolipid biosynthesis highlighting the branching of the pathway at acylation of sphinganine by the lass (cers) family ceramide synthases. starting
at the top is the biosynthesis of sphinganine, which can be acylated by the lass gene products shown with their fatty acyl-coa preference. the abbreviation shows the
sphingoid base backbone using the abbreviated nomenclature of fig. 1 followed by the alkyl-chain length and number of double bonds of the fatty acid. each
dihydroceramide (dhcer) can be desaturated to the comparable ceramide (cer) and both have several possible fates, as illustrated by the overlay within the dashed box
on the left: conversion to (dh)cer phosphate, (dh)cerp; (dh)sphingomyelin, (dh)sm; glucosyl(dh)cer, glc(dh)cer; galactosyl(dh)cer, gal(dh)cer; or
hydrolysis to the free sphingoid base, that can be phosphorylated (sap and sop). not shown are the equivalent conversions that could be effected for backbone 4-
hydroxydihydroceramides (phytoceramide). one additional pathway shown at the left is the synthesis of n-acetyl-sphinganine and -sphingosine (c2cer) by
transacetylation (ta) from platelet activating factor (paf).
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
1871
(tsc10) was first identified in yeast [87], followed by the
discovery that the 3ksr of mammals is encoded by a gene
previously described as the follicular
lymphoma variant
translocation-1 (fvt-1) gene. the mrna of fvt-1 is
transcribed ubiquitously in different tissues of humans and
mice, with greater abundance of steady state mrna observed in
placenta, lung, kidney, stomach, and small intestine [86]. the
fvt-1 protein is predicted to have three transmembrane
domains; the n-terminus is in the lumen of the er, whereas
the active site residues and the c-terminus are in the cytosol
[86].
reduction of 3ksa is not thought to be rate limiting because
ksr activity in vitro is higher than for spt [88]; however,
3ksa based sphingolipids have been reported in mitochondria
[89] (although the structural assignment is somewhat incon-
clusive because these authors also reported the presence of an
implausible t21:1 phytosphingosine in mitochondria). we have
not seen 3ksa in cells by esi ms/ms, however, one can
envision that one might be able to overload the reduction step
by producing 3ksa at an elevated rate. to test this hypothesis,
we examined hek cells that were stably transfected with both
sptlc1 and sptlc2 (obtained from david uhlinger and
david perry), which have a 4–8 fold increase in de novo
sphingolipid biosynthesis. even in these cells, there were no
detectable 3-keto-sphingolipids when analyzed by mass
spectrometry; however, when the cells were incubated with
supplemental serine and palmitate, 3-ketodihydroceramides
were readily detected [58] (fig. 5). therefore, it appears that
when there is “overflow” of 3ksa, it is more likely to be
acylated than accumulate as the sphingoid base.
3.1. (dihydro)ceramide synthase(s)
at one time, it was thought that cells may contain one or two
that would utilize a wide
(dihydro)ceramide synthase(s)
fig. 5. appearance of 3-ketodihydroceramides in cells overexpressing serine
palmitoyltransferase when provided with the precursors serine and palmitic acid.
shown in the hatched bars are the amounts of 3-ketodihydroceramides
(expressed as pmol/mg of cellular protein) with different acyl chain lengths,
as measured by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry in hek cells
stably overexpressing serine palmitoyltransferase. when the culture medium is
supplemented with 10 mm serine and 0.1 mm palmitate (+p and s), which
increases the rate of sphingoid base formation (not shown), the black bars show
increases in 3-ketodihydroceramides that occur. for comparison, the amounts of
ceramide in these cells are shown in the gray bars.
there are at
spectrum of sphingoid bases and fatty acyl-coa's [90]. the
first genes coding for cer synthase(s) were identified in sac-
charomyces cerevisiae, where two genes (lag1p and lac1p)
were found to account for synthesis of yeast cer (which contain
c26-fatty acids) [91,92], and a lower molecular weight protein
was later found to be required for activity [93]. mammalian
homologs of lag1p were then identified and the first (lass1) was
shown to be highly selective for stearoyl-coa and to make c18-
(dh)cer [94], which was followed by characterization of
additional substrate selective (dh)cer synthases [94,95]. it is
now known that
least six genes for (dh)cer
synthase(s) family (lass1–lass6) in mammalian cells [96]
and, which appear to optimally utilize the fatty acyl-coa's
shown in fig. 4, although some of these assignments should be
regarded as tentative until the enzymes are purified and the
activities can be examined more rigorously (the most definitive
proof has been for lass5 because it has been purified and the
reconstituted activity still selects c16:0 fatty acyl-coa) [97] . it
has also been suggested by futerman and colleagues that these
genes should be renamed cers as a more logical name for cer
synthases than lass) [98]. all but lass1 contain a hox
domain, a transcription factor
involved in developmental
regulation [95–99], but it would seem to be necessary for the
lass proteins to be post-translationally modified (i.e.,
proteolytically cleaved)
these motifs to function as
transcription factors (which would be interesting, indeed).
for
as the lass genes for individual subspecies of cer have
been identified, links between specific cer's and cell regulation/
disease have become easier to discern. for example, ogretmen
and co-workers [100] have discovered that head and neck tumors
have lower proportions of c18-cer than neighboring normal
tissue and that transfection of the lass1 gene into head and
neck tumor cells in culture suppressed cell growth. relatively
little is known about this subclass of ceramides. however, in a
“sphingolipidomic” analysis of cells for sarah spiegel's lab
[101], we have observed that administration of exogenous so
causes significant enrichment of c18-cer. a similar finding has
been made using cells overexpressing spt (ying liu and a.h.
merrill, jr., unpublished data), therefore, it appears that lass1
is subject to regulation by the availability of its sphingoid base
substrate.
cer synthase activity is inhibited by fumonisins, a family of
mycotoxins produced by fusarium verticillioides [102] that
cause a wide range of diseases of agriculture animals (equine
leukoencephalomalacia and porcine pulmonary edema) and
humans (cancer and birth defects) [12]. the structure of
fumonisin b1 and the characteristics of the inhibition suggest
that the aminopentol backbone competes for binding of the
sphingoid base substrate, whereas the anionic tricarballylic
acids may interfere with binding of the fatty acyl-coa [103].
the inhibition of cer synthase(s) causes the accumulation of sa
and sa-1-phosphate as well as depletion of complex sphingo-
lipids—all of which are likely to contribute to the toxicity/
carcinogenicity [103,104] and teratogenicity [12,105] of the
fumonisins. there is also an intriguing interplay between
sphingolipids and tnfα in modulating fumonisin-induced
hepatotoxicity [106–108] which might be related to the known
1872
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
ability of cytokines to induce serine palmitoyltransferase [77]
and other suggested links between de novo sphingolipid
biosynthesis and turnover in tnfα signaling and toxicity
[109,110].
3.2. dihydroceramide desaturase(s)
after the initial suggestion that incorporation of the 4,5-
trans-double bond of so occurred at the dhcer level [111],
this was established conclusively by a combination of in vivo
labeling studies [112] and development of an assay for this
highly labile enzyme [113]. dhcer desaturases were then
cloned from plants [114,115],
leading to the subsequent
identification of the desaturase genes from many organisms:
δ4-desaturase (des1) genes of homo sapiens, mus musculus,
drosophila melanogaster, and candida albicans and a bifunc-
tional δ4-desaturase/c4-hydroxylase (des2)
from homo
sapiens and mus musculus [116–119]. although both des1
and des2 genes exist
in yeast, saccharomyces cerevisiae
sphingolipids contain mainly phytoso as a sphingoid base
[120], which is a so fairly prevalent in skin, intestine, and
kidney cells [121]. des activity is influenced by the alkyl chain
length of the sphingoid base and fatty acid, the stereochemistry
of the sphingoid base (d-erythro versus l-threo-dihydrocer-
amides), the nature of headgroup, and the ability to utilize
alternative reductants [113]. introduction of the 4,5-double
bond can be analyzed using nbd-dhcer, which reveals
interesting features about the stereoselectivity of the reaction
and subsequent metabolism [51].
relatively little is known about des1 and des2, but the
desaturation reaction can be reproduced in vitro using either
dhcer or dihydrosphingomyelin [113] with nadh or nadph
and molecular oxygen as co-substrates, and appears to be part of
the cytochrome b5 electron transport system of the er. dhcer
desaturase(s) are inhibited by dithiothreitol (dtt) and n-
acetylcysteine, hence, one can envision that elevation of cellular
thiols could suppress formation of ceramides [113]. the
characteristics of this enzyme are similar to other desaturases,
and inhibitors and redox effectors known to affect δ9-stearoyl-
coa desaturase and δ1-plasmanyl-ethanolamine desaturase
severely inhibited dihydroceramide desaturation [113,122].
3.2.1. generation of ceramide by the reverse reaction of
ceramidase
ceramidase catalyzes the hydrolysis of cer, but the reverse
reaction (cer synthesis from free fatty acid and so) is not
only possible due to microscopic reversibility, but has been
found to be relatively rapid under certain conditions
[123,124]. the reverse reaction has strict stereochemical
requirements for d-erythro-sphingosine [123,124], d-erythro-
sphinganine, and d-erythro-phytosphingosine but can accom-
modate a wide spectrum of a fatty acids,
including both
saturated and unsaturated fatty acids [123] and chain lengths
varying from c8 to c22 [124]. detergents, ph, and various
lipids such as cardiolipin, phosphatidylcholine, and lysopho-
sphatidylcholine can affect the hydrolysis reverse activity of
ceramidase(s) [124].
3.2.2. generation of c2-ceramide by platelet-activating factor
(paf)-dependent transacetylase
sphingoid bases can be acetylated by a platelet-activating
factor (paf)-dependent transacetylase that transfers the acetyl
group from paf in a coa-independent manner [125]. the paf-
dependent transacetylase is widely distributed among the tissues
and appears to be less active with sa than so [126].
nonetheless, c2-dhcer has been found in cells and animals
treated with fumonisin b1 (as well as the untreated controls)
[103], and it
is not clear if this is produced by the paf
transacylase or a more generic acetyltransferase used in
detoxification of xenobiotics.
3.2.3. generation of ceramide by turnover of complex
sphingolipids
(smase)
[90,127–130],
in contemplating the sources of the lipid backbones in cells,
one must take into account not only the compounds that are
derived from de novo sphingolipid synthesis, but also that cer
are also produced by turnover of complex sphingolipids that are
in the cell or taken up from culture medium. the major sources
for the ceramide backbone are the hydrolysis sphingomyelin
(sm) by sphingomyelinase(s)
the
hydrolysis of glccer and galcer by glycohydrolases [131],
and dephosphorylation of cer1p by lipid phosphatase(s) [132].
sphingomyelinase(s) are distinguished according to their ph
optima and subcellular localization, and to date several have
been characterized:
lysosomal acid sphingomyelinase
(asmase), zinc ion-dependent secretory sphingomyelinase
(ssmase), neutral magnesium ion-dependent smase (nsmase),
and alkaline smase (bsmase) [133]. inducers of sm turnover
are diverse and include the tumor necrosis factor (tnf) receptor
family ligands, anticancer drugs, oxidants, and conditions
known to induce cellular stress [133]. these are all categorized
as phospholipase c's, i.e., cleave the phosphodiester bond on
the side of the linkage to cer, so the products are cer and
choline phosphate. the venom of the brown recluse spider and
some other organisms contain smase d's that produce cer 1-
phosphate and choline, and a similar activity has been found in
some bacteria, which has been suggested to reflect lateral gene
transfer [134]. recent studies (k. uyesugi et al., manuscript in
preparation) have found that
the venom also hydrolyzes
ceramide phosphoethanolamine, which is the major phospho-
sphingolipids in flies and many other insects.
reversal of synthesis is another potential source of cer
because sm synthases convert diacylglycerol (dag) plus sm
to cer and phosphatidylcholine (pc). this activity is found
mostly localized in the golgi and, to some extent, the plasma
membrane [135]. it has been suggested that the ratios of pc/sm
and dag/cer are intrinsically related, with possible implica-
tions for cross-talk between glycerolipid and sphingolipid
signaling [130].
turnover of glycosphingolipids is also an important source
of cer and the degree to which the backbone is salvaged versus
degraded varies considerably depending on the cell type and
conditions [136]. one of the first reports suggesting that
glycosphingolipids may contribute to cer signaling has recently
been published [137].
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
1873
3.2.4. formation of
short-chain ceramide
long-chain ceramide from exogenous
in studies of the effects of short-chain cer, investigators at
the medical university of south carolina found that exogen-
ously added short-chain cer undergoes deacylation followed by
recycling of the so backbone by reacylation with a long-chain
fatty acid [49], and because the reacylation was inhibited by
fb1 [49], they suggest that cer synthase may be responsible.
4. removal of ceramide by hydrolysis or incorporation into
other sphingolipids
the partner to formation of the lipid backbones is their
removal, and this occurs both by turnover and utilization to
biosynthesize more complex sphingolipids.
4.1. ceramide turnover to sphingosine
ceramidases catalyze the hydrolysis of cer to free fatty acid
and sphingoid base. there are three types of mammalian
ceramidases classified by the ph optimum of the activity and
subcellular localization: acid ceramidase [138], neutral/alkaline
ceramidase [123,139], and alkaline ceramidase [140]. cerami-
dase controls cellular cer amount by responding to extracellular
stimuli, such as interleukin-1β [141], nitric oxide [142],
oxidized low density lipoprotein [143], and platelet-derived
growth factor [144].
4.2. sphingosine metabolism
cer degradation is the only known source of intracellular so
[145] (i.e., there is no known reaction that adds the 4,5-double
bond to sa directly), therefore, free so is either derived from
sphingolipid turnover or taken up from an exogenous source
(which could be a substantial route since blood is thought to
contain ca 0.1 to 1 μm so and s1p) [146,147]. in addition, sa
shares many of the biochemical properties of so [41], and sa (as
well as sa1p) amounts can be very high, as exemplified by the
levels that are achieved when cells are treated with fumonisin
b1 to inhibit cer synthase [103,148].
cellular amounts of so are controlled (c.f., fig. 2) by: (a)
removal by reacylation, as mentioned above for the recycling of
the so from short-chain cer, and as part of recycling of other
categories of sphingolipids [131]; (b) removal by phosphoryla-
tion by so kinases (sphk1 and sphk2) [149], which are well
established to be important mediators of cell migration, survival,
differentiation, angiogenesis, and development [150], (c)
production from s1p by the hydrolysis by s1p phosphatase
(s1pp) [151], and possibly other lipid phosphatases, and (d)
irreversible degradation by s1p lyase (spl), a plp-dependent
enzyme that catalyzes the cleavage of s1p to ethanolamine
phosphate and a long-chain aldehyde [152]. the turnover of
sphingoid bases does not only remove potential signaling
molecules but also provides precursors for other lipids, and in
at least one system, the turnover of sphingoid bases has been
estimated to account for as much as one third of the ethanolamine
phosphate in phosphatidylethanolamine [153,154].
studies of s1p lyase using mass spectrometry to characterize
the consequences of overexpressing lyase activity illustrate the
types of surprises that use of sphingolipidomics can produce
[152]. one might predict from the scheme shown in fig. 2 that
overexpression of the lyase would not only deplete cells of s1p
(as well as sa1p), but also reduce cer and other complex
sphingolipids because sphingoid bases in general would be
diverted to degradation. as predicted, the cells had reduced
baseline so and s1p but had elevated stress-induced cer
generation that correlated with increased cell death due to
apoptosis. the most likely explanation for this seeming paradox
is that de novo sphingolipid biosynthesis was elevated in s1p
lyase overexpressing cells because s1p appears to function as a
feedback regulator of the pathway [85].
5. removal of ceramide by metabolism to more complex
sphingolipids
cer is at
the branchpoint for biosynthesis hundreds of
complex sphingolipids as summarized in [155] and can be seen
in www.sphingomap.com. the initial metabolites that are
formed directly from cer
in
mammalian cells are shown in the left overlay of fig. 4 (sm,
glccer, galcer and cer1p, etc.) and each (as well as a less
prevalent pathway, 1-acylation) are discussed briefly below:
(as well as from dhcer)
5.1. sphingomyelins
cer is metabolized to sm at
the cis and medial golgi
[156,157] and plasma membrane [158,159] by sm synthases
that catalyze the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phospha-
tidylcholine to the 1-hydroxyl of cer [160,161]. a family of
integral membrane proteins have been identified as responsible
for sm synthesis; sms1 localized to the golgi, and sms2
localized to the plasma membrane [162].
5.2. ceramide-1-phosphates
cer is phosphorylated by cer kinase (cerk) , a cytosolic
enzyme that has some similarity with so kinases, but additional
conserved regions that are unique to cerk [163], cerk is
active with a variety of cer with fatty acyl chain lengths >4
carbons, and displays higher activity when the sphingoid base
has a 4,5-trans double bond [164]. cer1p synthesis has been
reported to be inhibited by a novel f-12509a oletin isomer, k1,
which has been reported to inhibit cerk without effecting
other so kinases [165].
5.3. glucosylceramides and galactosylceramides
glccer is synthesized by udp-glucose:cer glucosyltransfer-
ase (cglct, or sometimes abbreviated gcs) on the cytosolic
side of the golgi apparatus, and possibly the smooth er, which
[166–168] a number of
utilizes cer and udp-glucose.
inhibitors of cglct have been developed [169], such as d,l-
threo-1-phenyl-2-decanoylamino-3-morpholino-1-propanol
(pdmp) [170], ppmp [171], n-butyldeoxygalactonojirimycin
1874
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
beginning to be able to discern the subcellular localization of the
compounds [212] but this is undoubtedly the next step in the
evolution of this technology. the trafficking of sphingolipids
has been part of many elegant studies [213–215] and is
discussed by futerman and co-workers in another review in this
monograph [216]. the relatively recent finding [217,218] of a
critical cer trafficking protein, cert, illustrates how there are
undoubtedly participants in these processes that yet await
discovery.
7. biological activities of the lipid backbones of
sphingolipids
that
mindful
the lipid backbones of sphingolipids are
involved not just in “signaling” but also “sphingaling,” the
following section provides a brief overview of the molecular
targets of the bioactive sphingolipid backbones (so and cer and
the 1-phosphates) (fig. 6) as a context for understanding the
need for lipidomic analysis, and some surprises that have
surfaced in these analyses.
7.1. sphingosine, other sphingoid bases and sphingoid base
1-phosphates as bioactive species
the first sphingolipids that were shown to affect an
identifiable cell signaling target in vitro and with intact cells
was the inhibition of protein kinase c by so [219–221]. follow-
up structure–function studies discovered that essentially all
stereoisomers as well as n-methyl-derivatives (mono-, di- and
tri-methyl-), chain length homologs, etc. are inhibitory
[41,222]. the inhibition by the n-methyl-derivatives was
presumed to be of marginal physiologic interest because these
(nb-dnj), [172] n-alkyl-deoxygalactonojirimycin (n-alkyl-
dgj) [173] and in blocking glccer synthesis, these compounds
can increase cer [174]. some of the p-glycoprotein antagonists
also limit glccer synthesis [175], however it is not known
whether this is by interference with lipid flippase(s) [176] or
through cglct interaction. once cer reaches the golgi, it (as
well as glccer) also must traverse the membrane for synthesis
of sm and the higher order glycosphingolipids.
galactosylceramide (galcer) is synthesized in the lumen of
the er by udp-galactose:cer galactosyltransferase (cgalt, or
sometimes abbreviated cgt) [177,178]. because galcer is
synthesized in the lumen of the er, the substrates must traverse
the membrane. little is known about the ability of cer to flip
across the er membrane, however, udp-galactose transport is
thought to involve the udp-galactose transporter 2 (ugt2), a
splice variant of ugt1 that contains an er locating di-lysine
motif (kvkas) [179] and in some cases, ugt1 [177].
if
although this review is focused on the lipid backbones of
it warrants mention that glccer [180–188],
sphingolipids,
galcer [189], and downstream metabolites are also modulators
of cell behavior, hence,
interference with backbone
metabolism also affects these compounds, they may contribute
to changes in cell phenotype. in addition, glycosphingolipid
turnover is clearly important as exemplified by the nature of the
pathologies associated with glycosphingolipid storage diseases
[190–198]. although accumulation of the substrate of the
defective hydrolase plays a role in these diseases (e.g., glccer
in gaucher's disease [199–201] and galcer in krabbe's disease
[202]), accumulation of other highly bioactive compounds, such
as psychosine (a lysoglycosphingolipid that lacks the fatty acyl
sidechain but retains the carbohydrate headgroup) also appears
to play a role in pathogenesis [203,204].
5.4. other ceramide metabolites
in addition to these major products, 1-o-acylceramide is
synthesized by 1-o-acylceramide synthase which transfers the
sn-2-acyl group of phosphatidylethanolamine or phosphatidyl-
choline to cer [205]. 1-o-acylceramide synthase is encoded for
by the lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase-like lysophospholi-
pase gene (llpl) [206], and is inhibited by pdmp [207].
some sphingolipids are covalently attached to protein, for
examples: ω-hydroxy-cer and -glccer are attached to surface
proteins of skin [208,209] and inositol-phosphocer are used as
membrane anchors for some fungal proteins [210,211].
6. subcellular localization of sphingolipid biosynthesis and
turnover
the scheme in fig. 2 for the localization of sphingolipid
biosynthesis and turnover depicts only a small fraction of the
intracellular compartments – and within a compartment, the
presence of different microdomains – that can determine
whether a sphingolipid of interest has access to the pertinent
enzyme or target, which is clearly required for a complete
picture of sphingolipid metabolism and function. unfortunately,
the analysis of cellular metabolites by mass spectrometry is only
fig. 6. summary of some of the key signaling targets that are affected by the
lipid backbones of sphingolipids and their metabolic interrelationships (protein
kinase a, pka; 3-phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1, pdk1; sphingosine
dependent kinase 1, sdk1; protein kinase c, pkc; protein phosphatase 1,
pp1; protein phosphatase 2a, pp2a; acid sphingomyelinase, asmase;
phospholipase a2, pla2; sphingosine-1-phosphase, s1p). also noted is that
the biophysical properties of ceramides and ceramide 1-phosphates may play
important
roles in cell signaling by changing raft properties, making
membranes leaky, etc.
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
1875
compounds had only been noted indirectly [47]; therefore, it
was much to our surprise when we have recently found
substantial amounts of n-methyl- and n,n,n-trimethyl-sphin-
goid bases (as well as the n,n-dimethyl-derivative, but in barely
detectable amounts) by mass spectrometry in hek 293 cells
treated with exogenous so (fig. 7). this figure also illustrates
another change that is often seen upon addition of exogenous
so, a marked elevation in sa1p (and depending on the time
point and concentration, we often also see elevations in sa and
s1p, not shown). the elevation in sa (1-phosphate) is likely due
to the competition of exogenously added so for cer synthase,
diverting a portion of the newly made sa to sa1p (c.f., fig. 2).
therefore, when investigators add exogenous sphingoid bases
to cells (including as short-chain cer), there are changes in a
large number of endogenous metabolites as well as the
induction of new species, such as the n-methyl-derivatives,
that may be contributing to the cell behavior(s) under study.
other targets that have been identified for sphingoid bases
(fig. 6) are a so dependent protein kinase (which has been
identified as a proteolytic fragment of protein kinase cδ, also
termed the protein kinase cδ kinase domain, pkcδkd) that
phosphorylates 14-3-3 protein [223]; pdk1 [224]; protein
kinase a type ii, which is activated by so independent of camp
[225]; casein kinase [226]; and a number of ion channels
[103,227–230]. in addition, so has recently been suggested to
be an endogenous agonist for the cb1 cannabanoid receptor
(and for this receptor also to bind the so analog fty720) [231].
in addition, in yeast, sa and 4-hydroxysa (phytosphingosine)
affect several protein kinase pathways and appear to play key
roles in signaling, for example, for heat shock [232]. less has
been done in mammalian systems to link changes in free
sphingoid bases with downstream responses, with the exception
of pathological conditions where sphingoid bases are elevated
several orders of magnitude in animals that consume toxic
amounts of fumonisins [233].
fig. 7. appearance of n-methyl-sphingoid bases in hek cells incubated with
sphingosine. shown in the foreground are the amounts of sphingoid bases in
hek cells under usual culture conditions (sphingosine, so; sphinganine, sa; and
the 1-phosphates, sop and sap) as well as the amounts of metabolites with
mono-, di- and tri-methylation of the amino group (n-me, n-me2 and n-me3),
as measured by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. the black
bars show the amounts of these compounds after incubation of the cells with
1 μm sphingosine for 24 h.
sphingoid base 1-phosphates are, arguably, fast becoming the
most extensively studied sphingolipid mediators, and rather than
discuss them here, the reader is referred to the review in this
series by spiegel and co-workers [233] or others from this lab on
targeting s1p in cancer [234], neural and vascular development
[235], and asthma [236], for just a few of the important links
between s1p and disease. it is also worth noting in fig. 6, that en
route to formation of sphingoid base 1-phosphates (and after
their dephosphorylation, in the reverse direction), one removes
or produces another highly bioactive compound (so) — indeed,
it is often overlooked that free sphingoid bases are often as, or
more, cytotoxic than ceramides [237] (hence, in some cases
where s1p is protective against cell death, might this be due to
protection of the cells against accumulation of so or another
sphingolipid that might otherwise cause cytotoxicity?). con-
tinuing this train of thought, so is also produced from/or can lead
to cer, or which can be produced from/lead to cer1p or more
complex sphingolipids. these interrelationships underscore the
difficulty of knowing which bioactive compounds are important
in a given biological process; however, this opportunity for
coordinate regulation of many signaling pathways may be the
biological rationale for this pathway.
other “lyso”-type sphingolipids (i.e., ones with a free amino
group) include sphingosylphosphocholine (lysosm) [238–240]
and psychosine (e.g., galactosylsphingosine) [203,204]. both
are highly bioactive and, especially for the former, emerging as
likely new categories of backbone lipid signals.
7.2. ceramides and cer1p as bioactive species
soon after sphingosine was suggested to be a sphingolipid
second messenger, cer also became a candidate [241] and
proved to be the first backbone sphingolipid metabolite that
fulfilled the traditional requirement of a second messenger
signaling system, namely that it was produced in response to cell
stimulation, cer (or at least shorter chain analogs) were able to
induce comparable cell responses, and at least one protein was
identified as a direct target for cer in studies with intact cells and
in vitro [242,243]. of tremendous value to these studies was the
finding that the target (protein phosphatase pp2a, and later,
other cer targets) [243,244] was not activated – or at least only
weekly activated – by dihydrocer (e.g., c2-dhcer vs. c2-cer)
[245], which ruled out non-specific, membrane disruption as the
mechanism of action of the exogenously added cer. this
selectivity has been seen for all of the other cer targets shown in
fig. 6 (except for the biophysical effects of cer), which has
resulted in the impression that dhcer are not involved in cell
regulation. this may, indeed, not be correct as will be discussed
later in this review.
although there are many signaling pathways that are affected
by cer, at present, the following appear to be direct targets of
cer:
7.3. phosphoprotein phosphatases 1 and 2a
these multimeric proteins are activated by cer [244,246]
and perform critical functions for cell growth, survival and
1876
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
apoptosis [247]. activation of pp2a can induce apoptosis by
inactivating the anti-apoptotic target akt [248] and bcl2 [249],
and activating the pro-apoptotic proteins bad [250] and bax
[251]. activated pp1 appears to induce apoptosis through
alternative splicing bcl-x and caspase-9 [252]. another target
of cer, ksr (kinase suppressor of ras), may be downstream of
pp2a activation [253,254]. ksr is an essential upstream
regulator of tnfα-stimulated erk1/erk2 activation, most
likely mediated via direct phosphorylation of raf-1 [255], and
can protect intestinal epithelial cells from under going apoptosis
during tnfα [256]. recent structural elucidation of the ksr
c1 domain by nmr has revealed the presence of a cysteine rich
region which are normally associated with lipid and protein;
hence, cer may also interact with ksr directly [257].
7.4. protein kinase c (pkc)
many members of the pkc family are affected by cer. cer
promotes phosphorylation and translocation of pkcα, pkcδ
and pkcε [258–260] to the golgi but inhibits the juxtanuclear
translocation of pkcβ2 [261, 262]. pkcξ is activated by the
direct binding of cer, which leads to the formation of a pro-
apoptotic complex with prostate apoptosis response-4 (par4)
[263]. activated pkcξ also regulates gene expression through
the nuclear factor-kappa b (nf-κb) [264] activity, while it
modulates alternative splicing of mrna by phosphorylating
hnrnpa1 to causes it to translocate to the nucleus [265].
7.5. cathepsin d
cer was first found to bind to cathepsin d when this protease
was isolated by cer affinity chromatography [266]. production
of cer by acid sphingomyelinase (a-smase) in response to
tnfα, cd95, and chemotherapeutic agents [267] activates
cathepsin d to induce caspase-independent apoptosis. the
endosomal protease activity of cathepsin d is responsible for
cleaving and activating bid [268], a pro-apoptotic protein that
affects the release of cytochrome c and activation of caspase 3
and 9.
7.6. other possible targets of cer
it has been reported that cer directly binds to activate stress-
activated protein kinase (sapk/jnk) and induces glomerular
epithelial cells to undergo apoptosis [269]. one can also
envision that any cer binding protein, such as cert and
enzymes that utilize cer as an enzymatic substrate (or product),
may function as cer sensors if they either serve as a depot
(buffer) or possibly transduce information to other regulatory
pathways via protein–protein interactions. more information
about cer binding proteins has been provided in the review by
hannun and colleagues in this monograph [270].
as noted earlier, the biophysical properties of cer allow
membranes to undergo structural changes that can be viewed as
analogous to the activation or inactivation of a signaling target
[271]. lipid microdomains (rafts)
that are enriched in
sphingolipids promote assembly of receptors and proteins that
favor signaling activation, and this has been suggested to
contribute to signaling via cd95 [272], fasl [273], fcγrii
[274], uv-induced caspase activation [275], and the clustering
of the p2x7 receptor responsible for pla2 activation [276,277].
induction of membrane “leakiness” [52–54] might be regarded
as analogous to opening of an ion channel, and if the channel is
large enough, perhaps sufficient to allow efflux of pro-apoptotic
mediators.
phosphorylation of cer to produce cer 1-phosphate is
multifunctional, with the consequences being (not necessarily in
this temporal order nor ranking of importance): (a) consumption
of cer, therefore, termination of structural and signaling (i.e.,
“sphingaling”) processes that depend on cer per se; (b)
appearance of a negatively charged phospholipid that, pre-
sumably, will be located on only one side of the bilayer, hence,
could promote membrane curvature; (c) alteration of the surface
charge of the membrane and its capacity to bind ions, proteins,
etc.; (d) selective interactions with other membrane components
(within the membrane or bound to the surface) to induce
conformation changes that activate or inhibit the biochemical
function(s) of the cellular components (such as to activate a
protein kinase); and, (e) creation of a new species that can be
acted upon by enzymes, binding proteins, etc. to terminate these
changes and progress to the next step in the chain of events
linked to these molecules (which may be another step in a
signaling cascade or reestablishment of the initial “basal” state).
as discussed in the review in this monograph by a. gómez-
muñoz and coworkers [278], production of cer 1-phosphate has
been associated with key regulatory processes such as
stimulation of dna synthesis and induction of proliferating-
cell nuclear antigen [279] as well as inhibition of apoptosis
(through suppression of acid sphingomyelinase activity to
prevent accumulation of cer) [280], stimulation of pi3-kinase
leading to activation of the transcription factor nf-κb and
upregulation of anti-apoptotic bclxl [281], and activation of
phospholipase a2 and eicosanoid production [282–284]. cer1p
also plays an important role in phagocytosis [55].
7.7. dhcer as bioactive species?
dhcer are generally regarded to be innocuous because they
have generally not been found to mimic cer in studies of cer
targets in vitro nor when short-chain (dh)cer have been added
to intact cells [245]. therefore, we were quite surprised when
mass spectrometric analysis of cells treated with 4-hydroxy-
phenylretinamide (4hpr, also called fenretinide) – an agent
that has heretofore been thought to cause large increases in cer
to induce growth arrest and apoptosis as at least part of the
mechanism of action of this cancer chemotherapeutic agent
[83,285,286] – did not display increases in cer (fig. 8, gray
bars) (indeed, in some cases, cer mass decreased), but rather
large increases in dhcer (fig. 8, black bars). this distinction
was overlooked before because the previous studies analyzed
cer by techniques such as thin-layer chromatography or
quantitation with diglyceride kinase where the dhcer are not
readily distinguishable from cer. the possibility that agents
thought to elevate cer might instead cause increases in dhcer
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
1877
it
roles in digestion of
while autophagy is most often thought of as a mechanism to
supply essential nutrients during starvation,
is now also
considered to be part of ongoing cell maintenance as well as to
play important
foreign organisms
(xenophagy) and antigen presentation [295]. autophagy has
been described as a “double-edged sword” [296] because it can
both contribute to, and protect
from, disease [297]. for
example, in cancer autophagy can be utilized by tumors as a
means to avoid apoptosis in a nutrient and growth-factor limited
environment but can also be a chemotherapeutic target by
suppression of autophagy or conversion of safe to lethal
autophagy (by destabilization of the autophagolysosome and
leakage of proteases into the cytoplasm) [298,299].
fig. 8. elevation of dihydroceramide (and not ceramide) in the human prostate
cancer cell line du145 by treatment with fenretinide (4-hydroxyphenylretina-
mide, 4hpr). the du145 cells were treated with the shown concentrations of
fenretinide then the cer (in grey) and dhcer (in black) were analyzed by liquid
chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.
has only rarely been considered before (an exception being a
recent study of the effects of γ-tocopherol on lncap cells
which also noted an elevation in dhcer) [287],2 and raises the
question: can dhcer also serve as bioactive species, and if so,
how?
it
from a biophysical perspective,
is relatively easy to
envision how dhcer might perform different cell functions
than cer because they have a higher dipole potential compared
to cer, which could decrease the packing density [289]; they
have a lesser tendency than cer to promote flip-flop [290]; and
are less prone to form membrane channels [291]. in addition to
these biophysical properties (or perhaps because of them), we
have found a cellular process that can be induced by dhcer –
the formation of autophagosomes – and this may be one of the
cell regulatory functions of these sphingolipid backbones.
8. sphingolipids and autophagy
autophagy (“self-eating”) is a normal physiologic mechan-
ism for the turnover of cellular proteins, excess and damaged
organelles [292,293], and is sometimes subdivided into three
types [294]: microautophagy, where cytosolic components are
directly engulfed by lysosomes; chaperone-mediated autop-
hagy, which uses transport proteins to move components into
the lysosome; and macroautophagy (which is often referred to
as “autophagy,” including in this review), where proteins and
organelles are sequestered into double membrane vesicles
known as autophagosomes that fuse with lysosomes to form
autophagolysosomes, where the degradation is completed.
2 schulz et al. [288] a. schulz, t. mousallem, m. venkataramani, d.a.
persaud-sawin, a. zucker, c. luberto, a. bielawska, j. bielawski, j.c.
holthuis, s.m. jazwinski, l. kozhaya, g.s. dbaibo and r.m. boustany, j.
biol. chem. 281 (2006) 2784-94. have also used 4hpr to elevate dhcer, but
acknowledge in their manuscript that this was suggested to them by our
discovery that 4hpr inhibits dhcer desaturation.
recent studies have elegantly established that addition of
exogenous cer can induce autophagy, and the autophagy
induced by agents such as tamoxifen involves endogenous
sphingolipids [300,301]. to establish that autophagosomes are
being formed, these investigations have used: (a) microscopy to
establish that structures resembling macroautophagosomes are
induced in malignant glioma cells (u373-mg and t98g) and
colon cancer (ht29) cells after treatment with c2-cer; (b)
measurement of the rate of protein degradation, one of the
functions of formation of autophagosomes, which is increased
in ht-29 cells after treatment with c2-cer (and to show that the
effect was attenuated by the autophagy inhibitor 3-methylade-
nine, 3ma) [302]; and (c) examination of the appearance of
large, acidic vesicular organelles that can be visualized by
acridine orange staining (and more specifically, monodansylca-
daverine, mdc) and are considered characteristic of autophagic
vacuoles,
in cells treated with c2-cer. in a more recent
approach that has become feasible due to advances in the
understanding of the early molecular events of autophagy, cells
have been transfected with a genetic construct
for green
fluorescent protein (gfp)-tagged lc3 protein (microtubule-
associated protein light chain 3), which is normally distributed
throughout the cytoplasm but is recruited to the er membrane
and appears in a punctate pattern early in the formation of
autophagosomes [303]. this punctate pattern was observed
after the cells were treated with c2-cer [300] and by other
perturbations of sphingolipid metabolism [304]. therefore,
these investigations have shown that cer induces autophagy by
all of
this
phenomenon.
the accepted criteria for establishment of
in addition to the induction of autophagy by exogenous
short-chain cer, codogno and co-workers [301] have shown
that tamoxifen (which elevates endogenous cer by inhibition of
glccer synthase [285]) induces autophagy. this study not only
found that changes in endogenous cer were correlated with
autophagy, but also, showed that tamoxifen-induced autophagy
was suppressed when cer synthesis was blocked by the spt
inhibitor myriocin (isp1) [301]. therefore, endogenous cer can
serve as a mediator in the induction of autophagy by other
agents.
in agreement with these investigations, we have found that
transfection of du145 cells with gfp-tagged lc3 protein
results in clustering of gfp-lc3 into punctate structures after
addition of c2-cer (fig. 9, upper right panel) versus the control
1878
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
fig. 9. induction of autophagy by n-acetyl-sphingosine (c2cer), -sphinganine (c2dhcer) and fenretinide (4hpr). du145 cells were transfected with a gfp-tagged
lc3 protein (a marker of autophagosomes) then after 24 h, treated with the shown compounds (at 10 μm) and examined by confocal microscopy after an additional
24 h. the arrows highlight regions where lc3-gfp fluorescence is associated with autophagosomes (auϕ) versus the cytoplasm (c) and, for reference, the darker
nuclear region (nuc).
cells with vehicle only (fig. 9, top left panel). in addition, cells
treated with 4hpr (fig. 9, lower right panel) also displayed
more punctate fluorescence than the control. because we have
found that 4hpr elevates dhcer, not cer, in these cells (fig.
8), du145 cells were treated with c2-dhcer under the same
conditions, which clearly caused gfp-lc3 fluorescence to
appear in punctate (autophagosomal) vesicles (fig. 9, lower
left). therefore, exogenous dhcer is able to induce autophagy
in du145 cells, and it is likely that the induction of autophagy
by 4hpr is due to the large increase in endogenous dhcer
(fig. 8). it would be interesting to know if some of the recently
developed chemical
inhibitors of dhcer desaturase have
similar effects on cells [305].
8.1. possible mechanisms for cer and dhcer induced
autophagy
exogenously added c2-cer and elevation of endogenous
cer with tamoxifen increase beclin 1 [301], an upstream
regulator of autophagy [306]. suppression of beclin 1
expression with sirna blunted the autophagic response of
u-251 glioblastoma cells to c2-cer, and it is possible that it
may facilitate the interaction of pi3k with upstream regulators
of autophagy [307]. class i pi3k and akt are suppressors of
autophagy, and cer is a well-known activator of pp2a, which
inhibits akt activation [301,308,309]. c2-cer has also been
shown to relieve il-13-mediated inhibition of autophagy [310],
which is thought to involve the class i pi3k/akt pathway
[304]. induction of autophagic cell death might also involve
bnip3, a cell-death inducing mitochondrial protein that was
induced by c2-cer in u373-mg and t98g cells [300].
intriguingly, none of these signaling pathways are known to
be induced by both cer and dhcer, therefore, it is possible that
there is another role for these compounds that involves other
target(s), or a biophysical effect of (dh)cer such as the
induction of membrane curvature since the formation of
autophagosomes involves major changes in membrane archi-
tecture. it
is also possible that a key mediator is another
sphingolipid metabolite(s) of cer and dhcer (such as the 1-
phosphate, since cer1p is known to play a role in phagocytosis)
[55].
another backbone lipid metabolite has been implicated in
autophagy is s1p [304]. over-expression of spkk1 promoted
autophagy which was not inhibited by fb1, which indicates its
mechanism is not dependent on n-acylation of sphingoid bases
(i.e., may be separate from cer). unlike cer-mediated
autophagy, sphk1-mediated autophagy was not associated
with an increase in beclin 1 protein [304] nor an inhibition of
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
1879
akt or the class i pi3k; however, the downstream regulator of
the pi3k/akt pathway and autophagy inhibitor mtor was
inhibited by sphk1 over-expression. a particularly interesting
finding of this study was that suppression of sphk1 expression
or activity by an inhibitor caused lethal autophagy, whereas,
sphk1 protected cells from apoptosis during starvation. hence,
what one envisions could be happening as cells make more
autophagosomes, etc. with respect to the possible consequences
for cell survival has been summarized in the model shown in
fig. 10.
this model begins with the presumption that elevation of cer
or dhcer induces the formation of autophagosomes, which
may be a more widely occurring phenomenon that is currently
appreciated because even a “classic” inducer of autophagy (i.e.,
serum starvation) has been seen to elevate cer [311]. after
autophagosomes are formed, they acquire lysosomal enzymes
such as acid ceramidase, which will hydrolyze at least some of
the cer (or dhcer) to sa and so, which will, in analogy to
lysosomal degradation of sphingolipids (c.g., fig. 2), will efflux
from the autophagolysosome to the cytosol and be reacylated or
phosphorylated. the finding that so kinase promotes autophagy
that does not progress to cell death suggests that
the
phosphorylation of sa and so removes these potentially
cytotoxic compounds (since free sphingoid bases are well
known to be cytotoxic) [41,43,237], in addition to activating
anti-apoptotic targets be controlled by sphingoid base 1-
in the absence of
phosphates [101,149,233]. therefore,
fig. 10. a hypothetical model that integrates the possible roles of multiple
sphingolipid backbones in the modulation of autophagy and autophagic death.
the scheme suggests that elevations in ceramide (cer) and/or dihydrocer
(dhcer) by various means (#1) may promote the formation of autophago-
somes (#2) that will be converted to autophagolysosomes by incorporation of
lysosomal hydrolases, resulting in cleavage of (dh)cer to sphinganine and
sphingosine, (sa)so (#3). if (sa)so exit the autophagolysosome (#4), they can
undergo phosphorylation to sphinganine 1-phosphate (sap) and sphingosine
1-phosphate (sop) by sphingosine kinase (sphk1) (#5a), which should favor
cell survival. if efflux is not facilitated by trapping the sphingoid bases in the
cytoplasm by phosphorylation, they may accumulate in the autophagolyso-
some and – perhaps in combination with (dh)cer – destabilize the
membrane (#5b) resulting in release of cathepsins (including cathepsin d,
which might be further activated by cer) (#6a) to ultimately activate caspases
(#6b) and cell death (r.i.p.).
sufficient so kinase activity, sphingoid bases could accumulate,
destabilize the autophagolysosomes, and cause release of
cathepsins and other cytotoxic factors [312,313]. this is an
attractive scenario because cer are activators of cathepsin d,
which in turn are known to be able to activate caspases and
induce apoptosis [266–268].
considering that
it
is not surprising that
the functions of autophagy include
degradation of damaged proteins and organelles and to enable
cells to deal with other stressful (e.g., low-nutrient) condi-
tions,
the pathway would have a
mechanism to do so safely, but to switch to a lethal mode
when the damage/stress is too severe for the cell to maintain
other normal characteristics (such as an undamaged genome,
etc.). these descriptors parallel the current thinking about the
effects of the lipid backbones of sphingolipids on cell survival
versus death, with sphingosine-1-phosphate being primarily
an inhibitor of apoptosis whereas cer and so promote
the scheme in fig. 10 – even if over-
apoptosis. thus,
simplified – may serve as a useful model for additional
studies of the interplay between sphingolipid metabolism and
autophagy because a better understanding of
these inter-
relationships could lead to new strategies for controlling
autophagy in muscular and neurodegeneration,
infection,
cancer and other disease.
9. summarizing comments
that the lipid backbones of sphingolipids play critical roles
in membrane structure and signaling is now beyond doubt, but
as has been illustrated for autophagy, it is not necessarily clear
for a given biological phenomenon if only one compound and
its cellular target(s) are sufficient
to regulate that cellular
function, or
if an ensemble of metabolically interrelated
compounds are necessary because their effects are synergistic,
with the synergy including temporal and/or spatial coordina-
tion. most complex biological processes require many levels
of coordinate regulation, and because sphingolipid metabolites
are capable of being lethal, one would assume that
the
regulation of these compounds would be very sophisticated.
indeed, until we have technologies like “sphingolipidomics” in
their future, more comprehensive, forms (that allow not only
the molecules to be identified and quantified, but also the
subcellular locations to be known), our understanding of how
a given biologic process is regulated by sphingolipids will be
incomplete. it is encouraging, nonetheless, that even if this is a
still somewhat of a fishing expedition, the works of many
sphingolipidologists – starting with thudichum – have
enlarged the waters so we now have a reasonable chance of
finding a whale.
acknowledgements
the majority of the new findings described in this review
were uncovered using resources provided by the lipid maps
consortium grant gm069338, and in some cases, as part of
research under nci-u19-ca87525. the authors thank collea-
gues who have also helped in the evolution of these ideas by
1880
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
their findings and discussions, and in particular katie fluke,
chris haynes, carrie pack and may wang.
references
[1] j.l.w. thudichum, the popular science monthly (1876) 724–727.
[2] j.l.w. thudichum, a treatise on the chemical constitution of brain,
bailliere, tindall, and cox, london, 1884.
[3] h.c. carter, w.j. haines, w.e. ledyard, w.p. norris, j. biol. chem. 169
(1947) 77–82.
[4] s. hakomori,
in: j.n. kanfer, s. hakomori
(eds.), sphingolipid
biochemistry, plenum press, new york, 1983, pp. 1–165.
[5] k. sandhoff, t. kolter, philos. trans. r. soc. london, ser. b biol. sci.
358 (2003) 847–861.
[6] r.w. watts, philos. trans. r. soc. london, ser. b biol. sci. 358 (2003)
975–983.
[7] e. schuchman, biochim. biophys. acta 1758 (2006) 2133–2138.
[8] r.o. brady, annu. rev. med. 57 (2006) 283–296.
[9] k. hanada, jpn. j. infect. dis. 58 (2005) 131–148.
[10] e. gulbins, biochim. biophys. acta 1758 (2006) 2139–2146.
[11] e. wang, w.p. norred, c.w. bacon, r.t. riley, a.h. merrill jr., j. biol.
chem. 266 (1991) 14486–14490.
[12] w.f. marasas, r.t. riley, k.a. hendricks, v.l. stevens, t.w. sadler, j.
gelineau-van waes, s.a. missmer, j. cabrera, o. torres, w.c.
gelderblom, j. allegood, c. martinez, j. maddox, j.d. miller, l. starr,
m.c. sullards, a.v. roman, k.a. voss, e. wang, a.h. merrill jr., j. nutr.
134 (2004) 711–716.
[13] k. bejaoui, c. wu, m.d. scheffler, g. haan, p. ashby, l. wu, p. de jong,
r.h. brown jr., nat. genet. 27 (2001) 261–262.
[14] j.l. dawkins, d.j. hulme, s.b. brahmbhatt, m. auer-grumbach, g.a.
nicholson, nat. genet. 27 (2001) 309–312.
[15] s. hakomori, proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 99 (2002) 10231–10233.
[16] e. suzuki, k. handa, m.s. toledo, s. hakomori, proc. natl. acad. sci.
u. s. a. 101 (2004) 14788–14793.
[17] b. ogretmen, y.a. hannun, nat. rev., cancer 4 (2004) 604–616.
[18] e.m. schmelz, a.s. bushnev, d.l. dillehay, d.c. liotta, a.h. merrill jr.,
nutr. cancer 28 (1997) 81–85.
[19] e.m. schmelz, d.l. dillehay, s.k. webb, a. reiter, j. adams, a.h.
merrill jr., cancer res. 56 (1996) 4936–4941.
[20] a. senchenkov, d.a. litvak, m.c. cabot, j. natl. cancer inst. 93 (2001)
347–357.
[21] g.k. schwartz, d. ward, l. saltz, e.s. casper, t. spiess, e. mullen, j.
woodworth, r. venuti, p. zervos, a.m. storniolo, d.p. kelsen, clin.
cancer res. 3 (1997) 537–543.
[22] p. fredman, k. hedberg, t. brezicka, biodrugs 17 (2003) 155–167.
[23] v.v. parekh, m.t. wilson, l. van kaer, crit. rev. immunol. 25 (2005)
183–213.
[24] b. visentin, j.a. vekich, b.j. sibbald, a.l. cavalli, k.m. moreno, r.g.
matteo, w.a. garland, y. lu, s. yu, h.s. hall, v. kundra, g.b. mills,
r.a. sabbadini, cancer cell 9 (2006) 225–238.
[25] t. levade, biochim. biophys. acta (2006).
[26] r. ghidoni, biochim. biophys. acta (2006).
[27] w.s. kim, c.e. chalfant, b. garner, curr. vasc. pharmacol. 4 (2006)
151–454.
[28] s.a. summers, prog. lipid res. 45 (2006) 42–72.
[29] h. hayashi, n. kimura, h. yamaguchi, k. hasegawa, t. yokoseki, m.
shibata, n. yamamoto, m. michikawa, y. yoshikawa, k. terao, k.
matsuzaki, c.a. lemere, d.j. selkoe, h. naiki, k. yanagisawa, j.
neurosci. 24 (2004) 4894–4902.
[30] h. satoi, h. tomimoto, r. ohtani, t. kitano, t. kondo, m. watanabe, n.
oka, i. akiguchi, s. furuya, y. hirabayashi, t. okazaki, neuroscience
130 (2005) 657–666.
[31] i.y. tamboli, k. prager, e. barth, m. heneka, k. sandhoff, j. walter, j.
biol. chem. 280 (2005) 28110–28117.
[32] x. han, curr. alzheim. res. 2 (2005) 65–77.
[33] t. hirabayashi, y. igarashi, a.h. merrill jr., sphingolipid biology, 1st ed.
springer, 2006.
[34] t.e. fox, c.m. finnegan, r. blumenthal, m. kester, cell. mol. life sci..
63 (2006) 1017–1023.
[35] h. fyrst, d.r. herr, g.l. harris, j.d. saba, j. lipid res. 45 (2004)
54–62.
[36] e. fahy, s. subramaniam, h.a. brown, c.k. glass, a.h. merrill jr., r.c.
murphy, c.r. raetz, d.w. russell, y. seyama, w. shaw, t. shimizu, f.
spener, g. van meer, m.s. vannieuwenhze, s.h. white, j.l. witztum,
e.a. dennis, j. lipid res. 46 (2005) 839–861.
[37] k.-a. karlsson, lipids (1970) 6–43.
[38] m.c. sullards, d.v. lynch, a.h. merrill jr., j. adams, j. mass spectrom.
35 (2000) 347–353.
[39] t. hikita, k. tadano-aritomi, n. iida-tanaka, s.b. levery, i. ishizuka, s.
hakomori, neurochem. res. 27 (2002) 575–581.
[40] c.w. slife, e. wang, r. hunter, s. wang, c. burgess, d.c. liotta, a.h.
merrill jr., j. biol. chem. 264 (1989) 10371–10377.
[41] a.h. merrill jr., s. nimkar, d. menaldino, y.a. hannun, c. loomis, r.m.
bell, s.r. tyagi, j.d. lambeth, v.l. stevens, r. hunter, et al.,
biochemistry 28 (1989) 3138–3145.
[42] m.j. hope, p.r. cullis, j. biol. chem. 262 (1987) 4360–4366.
[43] k. kagedal, m. zhao, i. svensson, u.t. brunk, biochem. j. 359 (2001)
335–343.
[44] y.a. hannun, a.h. merrill jr., r.m. bell, methods enzymol. (1991)
316–328.
[45] f.m. goni, biochim. biophys. acta (2006).
[46] b. maggio, biochim. biophys. acta (2006).
[47] y. igarashi, s. hakomori, biochem. biophys. res. commun. 164 (1989)
1411–1416.
[48] j. sot, f.m. goni, a. alonso, biochim. biophys. acta 1711 (2005)
12–19.
[49] b. ogretmen, b.j. pettus, m.j. rossi, r. wood, j. usta, z. szulc, a.
bielawska, l.m. obeid, y.a. hannun, j. biol. chem. 277 (2002)
12960–12969.
[50] r.e. pagano, m.a. sepanski, o.c. martin, j. cell biol. 109 (1989)
2067–2079.
[51] j.w. kok, m. nikolova-karakashian, k. klappe, c. alexander, a.h.
merrill jr., j. biol. chem. 272 (1997) 21128–21136.
[52] f.m. goni, f.x. contreras, l.r. montes, j. sot, a. alonso, biochem.
soc. symp. (2005) 177–188.
[53] l.r. montes, m.b. ruiz-arguello, f.m. goni, a. alonso, j. biol. chem.
277 (2002) 11788–11794.
[54] l.j. siskind, r.n. kolesnick, m. colombini, mitochondrion 6 (2006)
118–125.
[55] v. hinkovska-galcheva, l.a. boxer, a. kindzelskii, m. hiraoka, a.
abe, s. goparju, s. spiegel, h.r. petty, j.a. shayman, j. biol. chem.
280 (2005) 26612–26621.
[56] a. gomez-munoz, febs lett. 562 (2004) 5–10.
[57] s. levery, methods enzymol. (2005) 300–368.
[58] a.h. merrill jr., m.c. sullards, j.c. allegood, s. kelly, e. wang,
methods 36 (2005) 207–224.
[59] x. han, r.w. gross, mass spectrom. rev. 24 (2005) 367–412.
[60] b. domon, c.e. costello, biochemistry 27 (1988) 1534–1543.
[61] b. domon, j.e. vath, c.e. costello, anal. biochem. 184 (1990) 151–164.
[62] j. adams, ann. q., mass spectrom. rev. (1993) 51–85.
[63] q. ann, j. adams, j. am. soc. mass spectrom. (1992) 260–263.
[64] k. hanada, m. nishijima, m. kiso, a. hasegawa, s. fujita, t. ogawa, y.
akamatsu, j. biol. chem. 267 (1992) 23527–23533.
[65] m.m. nagiec, j.a. baltisberger, g.b. wells, r.l. lester, r.c. dickson,
proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 91 (1994) 7899–7902.
[66] k. hanada, m. nishijima, t. fujita, s. kobayashi, biochem. pharmacol.
59 (2000) 1211–1216.
[67] a.h. merrill jr., j. biol. chem. 277 (2002) 25843–25846.
[68] k. hanada, biochim. biophys. acta 1632 (2003) 16–30.
[69] e.c. mandon, i. ehses, j. rother, g. van echten, k. sandhoff, j. biol.
chem. 267 (1992) 11144–11148.
[70] s. yasuda, m. nishijima, k. hanada, j. biol. chem. 278 (2003)
4176–4183.
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
1881
[71] m.m. nagiec, r.l. lester, r.c. dickson, gene 177 (1996) 237–241.
[72] h. ikushiro, h. hayashi, h. kagamiyama, j. biol. chem. 276 (2001)
18249–18256.
[73] r.c. dickson, r.l. lester, m.m. nagiec, methods enzymol. 311 (2000)
3–9.
[74] k. hanada, t. hara, m. nishijima, o. kuge, r.c. dickson, m.m. nagiec,
j. biol. chem. 272 (1997) 32108–32114.
[75] k. gable, g. han, e. monaghan, d. bacikova, m. natarajan, r.
williams, t.m. dunn, j. biol. chem. 277 (2002) 10194–10200.
[76] m.r. hojjati, z. li, x.c. jiang, biochim. biophys. acta 1737 (2005)
44–51.
[77] r.a. memon, w.m. holleran, a.h. moser, t. seki, y. uchida, j. fuller,
j.k. shigenaga, c. grunfeld, k.r. feingold, arterioscler. thromb.
vasc. biol. 18 (1998) 1257–1265.
[78] a.m. farrell, y. uchida, m.m. nagiec, i.r. harris, r.c. dickson, p.m.
elias, w.m. holleran, j. lipid res. 39 (1998) 2031–2038.
[79] s.c. linn, h.s. kim, e.m. keane, l.m. andras, e. wang, a.h. merrill
jr., biochem. soc. trans. 29 (2001) 831–835.
[80] t. herget, c. esdar, s.a. oehrlein, m. heinrich, s. schutze, a. maelicke,
g. van echten-deckert, j. biol. chem. 275 (2000) 30344–30354.
[81] f. scarlatti, g. sala, g. somenzi, p. signorelli, n. sacchi, r. ghidoni,
faseb j. 17 (2003) 2339–2341.
[82] d.k. perry, j. carton, a.k. shah, f. meredith, d.j. uhlinger, y.a.
hannun, j. biol. chem. 275 (2000) 9078–9084.
[83] h. wang, b.j. maurer, c.p. reynolds, m.c. cabot, cancer res. 61 (2001)
5102–5105.
[84] a.h. merrill jr., e. wang, r.e. mullins, biochemistry 27 (1988) 340–345.
[85] e.c. mandon, g. van echten, r. birk, r.r. schmidt, k. sandhoff, eur. j.
biochem. 198 (1991) 667–674.
[106] r.p. sharma, n. bhandari, q. he, r.t. riley, k.a. voss, toxicology 159
(2001) 69–79.
[107] k.a. voss, r. riley, c. dunn, j. christopher corton, toxicology 222
(2006) 165–174.
[108] q. he, j. kim, r.p. sharma, toxicol. sci. 80 (2004) 335–342.
[109] s.g. meyer, h. de groot, biochim. biophys. acta 1643 (2003) 1–4.
[110] y. osawa, h. uchinami, j. bielawski, r.f. schwabe, y.a. hannun, d.a.
brenner, j. biol. chem. 280 (2005) 27879–27887.
[111] d.e. ong, r.n. brady, j. biol. chem. 248 (1973) 3884–3888.
[112] a.h. merrill jr., e. wang, j. biol. chem. 261 (1986) 3764–3769.
[113] c. michel, g. van echten-deckert, j. rother, k. sandhoff, e. wang, a.h.
merrill jr., j. biol. chem. 272 (1997) 22432–22437.
[114] p. sperling, u. zahringer, e. heinz, j. biol. chem. 273 (1998)
28590–28596.
[115] p. sperling, a. blume, u. zahringer, e. heinz, biochem. soc. trans. 28
(2000) 638–641.
[116] f. omae, m. miyazaki, a. enomoto, m. suzuki, y. suzuki, a. suzuki,
biochem. j. 379 (2004) 687–695.
[117] f. omae, m. miyazaki, a. enomoto, a. suzuki, febs lett. 576 (2004)
63–67.
[118] y. mizutani, a. kihara, y. igarashi, febs lett. 563 (2004) 93–97.
[119] p. ternes, s. franke, u. zahringer, p. sperling, e. heinz, j. biol. chem.
277 (2002) 25512–25518.
[120] d. haak, k. gable, t. beeler, t. dunn, j. biol. chem. 272 (1997)
29704–29710.
[121] l. coderch, o. lopez, a. de la maza, j.l. parra, am. j. clin. dermatol. 4
(2003) 107–129.
[122] l. geeraert, g.p. mannaerts, p.p. van veldhoven, biochem. j. 327 (pt. 1)
(1997) 125–132.
[86] a. kihara, y. igarashi, j. biol. chem. 279 (2004) 49243–49250.
[87] t. beeler, d. bacikova, k. gable, l. hopkins, c. johnson, h. slife, t.
[123] k. kita, n. okino, m. ito, biochim. biophys. acta 1485 (2000) 111–120.
[124] n. okino, x. he, s. gatt, k. sandhoff, m. ito, e.h. schuchman, j. biol.
dunn, j. biol. chem. 273 (1998) 30688–30694.
chem. 278 (2003) 29948–29953.
[88] r.d. williams, e. wang, a.h. merrill jr., arch. biochem. biophys. 228
(1984) 282–291.
[89] d. ardail, i. popa, k. alcantara, a. pons, j.p. zanetta, p. louisot, l.
thomas, j. portoukalian, febs lett. 488 (2001) 160–164.
[90] a.h. merrill jr., d.d. jones, biochim. biophys. acta 1044 (1990) 1–12.
[91] i. guillas, p.a. kirchman, r. chuard, m. pfefferli, j.c. jiang, s.m.
jazwinski, a. conzelmann, embo j. 20 (2001) 2655–2665.
[92] s. schorling, b. vallee, w.p. barz, h. riezman, d. oesterhelt, mol. biol.
cell 12 (2001) 3417–3427.
[93] b. vallee, h. riezman, embo j. 24 (2005) 730–741.
[94] k. venkataraman, c. riebeling, j. bodennec, h. riezman, j.c. allegood,
m.c. sullards, a.h. merrill jr., a.h. futerman, j. biol. chem. 277
(2002) 35642–35649.
[95] c. riebeling, j.c. allegood, e. wang, a.h. merrill jr., a.h. futerman, j.
biol. chem. 278 (2003) 43452–43459.
[96] y. mizutani, a. kihara, y. igarashi, biochem. j. 390 (2005) 263–271.
[97] s. lahiri, a.h. futerman, j. biol. chem. 280 (2005) 33735–33738.
[98] y. pewzner-jung, s. ben-dor, a.h. futerman, j. biol. chem. (2006).
[99] i. guillas, j.c. jiang, c. vionnet, c. roubaty, d. uldry, r. chuard, j.
wang, s.m. jazwinski, a. conzelmann, j. biol. chem. 278 (2003)
37083–37091.
[100] s. koybasi, c.e. senkal, k. sundararaj, s. spassieva, j. bielawski, w.
osta, t.a. day, j.c. jiang, s.m. jazwinski, y.a. hannun, l.m. obeid, b.
ogretmen, j. biol. chem. 279 (2004) 44311–44319.
[101] m. maceyka, h. sankala, n.c. hait, h. le stunff, h. liu, r. toman, c.
collier, m. zhang, l.s. satin, a.h. merrill jr., s. milstien, s. spiegel, j.
biol. chem. 280 (2005) 37118–37129.
[102] w.f. marasas, environ. health perspect.. 109 (suppl. 2) (2001) 239–243.
[103] a.h. merrill jr., m.c. sullards, e. wang, k.a. voss, r.t. riley, environ.
health perspect. 109 (suppl. 2) (2001) 283–289.
[104] r.t. riley, e. enongene, k.a. voss, w.p. norred, f.i. meredith, r.p.
sharma, j. spitsbergen, d.e. williams, d.b. carlson, a.h. merrill jr.,
environ. health perspect. 109 (suppl. 2) (2001) 301–308.
[105] j. gelineau-van waes, l. starr, j. maddox, f. aleman, k.a. voss, j.
wilberding, r.t. riley, birth defects res. a clin. mol. teratol. 73
(2005) 487–497.
[125] t. lee, adv. exp. med. biol. 416 (1996) 113–119.
[126] t.c. lee, m.c. ou, k. shinozaki, b. malone, f. snyder, j. biol. chem.
271 (1996) 209–217.
[127] a. van helvoort, w. van't hof, t. ritsema, a. sandra, g. van meer, j.
biol. chem. 269 (1994) 1763–1769.
[128] t. kudoh, m.a. velkoff, d.a. wenger, biochim. biophys. acta 754
(1983) 82–92.
[129] m.w. spence, j.t. clarke, h.w. cook, j. biol. chem. 258 (1983)
8595–8600.
[130] w.d. marggraf, j.n. kanfer, biochim. biophys. acta 793 (1984)
[131] g. tettamanti, glycoconj. j. 20 (2004) 301–317.
[132] o. boudker, a.h. futerman, j. biol. chem. 268 (1993) 22150–22155.
[133] n. marchesini, y.a. hannun, biochem. cell. biol. 82 (2004) 27–44.
[134] m.h. cordes, g.j. binford, bioinformatics 22 (2006) 264–268.
[135] g. van meer, curr. opin. cell biol. 5 (1993) 661–673.
[136] g. tettamanti, r. bassi, p. viani, l. riboni, biochimie 85 (2003)
346–353.
423–437.
[137] r. valaperta, v. chigorno, l. basso, a. prinetti, r. bresciniani, a. preti,
t. miyagi, s. sonnino, faseb j. 20 (2006) 1227–1229.
[138] j. koch, s. gartner, c.m. li, l.e. quintern, k. bernardo, o. levran, d.
schnabel, r.j. desnick, e.h. schuchman, k. sandhoff, j. biol. chem.
271 (1996) 33110–33115.
[139] s. el bawab, p. roddy, t. qian, a. bielawska, j.j. lemasters, y.a.
hannun, j. biol. chem. 275 (2000) 21508–21513.
[140] c. mao, r. xu, z.m. szulc, a. bielawska, s.h. galadari, l.m. obeid, j.
biol. chem. 276 (2001) 26577–26588.
[141] m. nikolova-karakashian, e.t. morgan, c. alexander, d.c. liotta, a.h.
merrill jr., j. biol. chem. 272 (1997) 18718–18724.
[142] a. huwiler, j. pfeilschifter, h. van den bosch, j. biol. chem. 274 (1999)
7190–7195.
[143] n. auge, m. nikolova-karakashian, s. carpentier, s. parthasarathy, a.
negre-salvayre, r. salvayre, a.h. merrill jr., t. levade, j. biol. chem.
274 (1999) 21533–21538.
[144] e. coroneos, m. martinez, s. mckenna, m. kester, j. biol. chem. 270
(1995) 23305–23309.
1882
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
[145] j. rother, g. van echten, g. schwarzmann, k. sandhoff, biochem.
biophys. res. commun. 189 (1992) 14–20.
[146] y. yatomi, y. igarashi, l. yang, n. hisano, r. qi, n. asazuma, k. satoh,
y. ozaki, s. kume, j. biochem. (tokyo) 121 (1997) 969–973.
[147] a.h. merrill, t.b. caligan, e. wang, k. peters, j. ou, methods enzymol.
312 (2000) 3–9.
[148] m.c. sullards, a.h. merrill jr., sci. stke 2001 (2001) pl1.
[149] m. maceyka, s.g. payne, s. milstien, s. spiegel, biochim. biophys.
acta 1585 (2002) 193–201.
[150] m.j. kluk, t. hla, biochim. biophys. acta 1582 (2002) 72–80.
[151] s.m. mandala, prostaglandins 64 (2001) 143–156.
[152] u. reiss, b. oskouian, j. zhou, v. gupta, p. sooriyakumaran, s. kelly, e.
wang, a.h. merrill jr., j.d. saba, j. biol. chem. 279 (2004) 1281–1290.
[153] e.r. smith, p.l. jones, j.m. boss, a.h. merrill jr., j. biol. chem. 272
(1997) 5640–5646.
[154] e.r. smith, a.h. merrill jr., j. biol. chem. 270 (1995) 18749–18758.
[155] a.h. merrill jr., k. sandhoff, in: d.e. vance, j.e. vance (eds.), new
comprehensive biochemistry: biochemistry of lipids, lipoproteins, and
membranes, elsevier science publishers, amsterdam, 2002.
[156] a.h. futerman, b. stieger, a.l. hubbard, r.e. pagano, j. biol. chem.
265 (1990) 8650–8657.
[157] d. jeckel, a. karrenbauer, r. birk, r.r. schmidt, f. wieland, febs lett.
261 (1990) 155–157.
[158] a. van den hill, g.p. van heusden, k.w. wirtz, biochim. biophys. acta
833 (1985) 354–357.
[159] m. malgat, a. maurice, j. baraud, j. lipid res. 27 (1986) 251–260.
[160] m.d. ullman, n.s. radin, j. biol. chem. 249 (1974) 1506–1512.
[161] d.r. voelker, e.p. kennedy, biochemistry 21 (1982) 2753–2759.
[162] k. huitema, j. van den dikkenberg, j.f. brouwers, j.c. holthuis, embo
j. 23 (2004) 33–44.
[163] m. sugiura, k. kono, h. liu, t. shimizugawa, h. minekura, s. spiegel,
t. kohama, j. biol. chem. 277 (2002) 23294–23300.
[164] d.s. wijesinghe, a. massiello, p. subramanian, z. szulc, a. bielawska,
c.e. chalfant, j. lipid res. 46 (2005) 2706–2716.
[165] j.w. kim, y. inagaki, s. mitsutake, n. maezawa, s. katsumura, y.w.
ryu, c.s. park, m. taniguchi, y. igarashi, biochim. biophys. acta 1738
(2005) 82–90.
[166] h. coste, m.b. martel, r. got, biochim. biophys. acta 858 (1986)
[185] a. schwarz, a.h. futerman, brain res. dev. brain res. 108 (1998)
125–130.
[186] a. schwarz, a.h. futerman, j. neurosci. 17 (1997) 2929–2938.
[187] e. lloyd-evans, d. pelled, c. riebeling, j. bodennec, a. de-morgan, h.
waller, r. schiffmann, a.h. futerman, j. biol. chem. 278 (2003)
23594–23599.
[188] s. yegneswaran, h. deguchi, j.h. griffin, j. biol. chem. 278 (2003)
14614–14621.
[189] a. raas-rothschild, i. pankova-kholmyansky, y. kacher, a.h. futer-
man, glycoconj. j. 21 (2004) 295–304.
[190] g. dawson, j.y. oh, clin. chim. acta 75 (1977) 149–153.
[191] e. korkotian, a. schwarz, d. pelled, g. schwarzmann, m. segal, a.h.
futerman, j. biol. chem. 274 (1999) 21673–21678.
[192] u.h. schueler, t. kolter, c.r. kaneski, g.c. zirzow, k. sandhoff, r.o.
brady, j. inherited metab. dis. 27 (2004) 649–658.
[193] i. ron, m. horowitz, hum. mol. genet. 14 (2005) 2387–2398.
[194] g. dacremont, j.a. kint, d. carton, g. cocquyt, clin. chim. acta 52
(1974) 365–367.
[195] o. nilsson, g. hakansson, s. dreborg, c.g. groth, l. svennerholm,
clin. genet. 22 (1982) 274–279.
[196] a. erikson, k. johansson, j.e. mansson, l. svennerholm, neuropedia-
trics 24 (1993) 237–238.
[197] m. horowitz, a. zimran, hum. mutat. 3 (1994) 1–11.
[198] m. jmoudiak, a.h. futerman, br. j. haematol. 129 (2005) 178–188.
[199] g. dawson, lipids 8 (1973) 154–156.
[200] y. ben-yoseph, m. hungerford, h.l. nadler, arch. biochem. biophys.
196 (1979) 93–101.
[201] d. jesionek-kupnicka, a. majchrowska, j. krawczyk, j. wendorff, m.
barcikowska, s. lukaszek, p.p. liberski, folia neuropathol. 35 (1997)
155–162.
[202] y. suzuki, neurochem. res. 23 (1998) 251–259.
[203] a. abe, j.a. shayman, j. biol. chem. 273 (1998) 8467–8474.
[204] u.h. schueler, t. kolter, c.r. kaneski, j.k. blusztajn, m. herkenham,
k. sandhoff, r.o. brady, neurobiol. dis. 14 (2003) 595–601.
[205] m. hiraoka, a. abe, j.a. shayman, j. biol. chem. 277 (2002)
10090–10099.
[206] l. lee, a. abe, j.a. shayman, j. biol. chem. 274 (1999) 14662–14669.
[207] m.e. stewart, d.t. downing, j. lipid res. 42 (2001) 1105–1110.
[208] p.w. wertz, d.t. downing, biochem. biophys. res. commun. 137
[209] t. doering, h. brade, k. sandhoff, j. lipid res. 43 (2002) 1727–1733.
[210] r. bosson, m. jaquenoud, a. conzelmann, mol. biol. cell 17 (2006)
[167] a.h. futerman, r.e. pagano, biochem. j. 280 (pt. 2) (1991) 295–302.
[168] d. jeckel, a. karrenbauer, k.n. burger, g. van meer, f. wieland, j. cell
(1986) 992–997.
biol. 117 (1992) 259–267.
[169] a. abe, s.r. wild, w.l. lee, j.a. shayman, curr. drug metab. 2 (2001)
2636–2645.
6–12.
331–338.
[170] r.r. vunnam, n.s. radin, chem. phys. lipids 26 (1980) 265–278.
[171] a. abe, n.s. radin, j.a. shayman, l.l. wotring, r.e. zipkin, r.
sivakumar, j.m. ruggieri, k.g. carson, b. ganem, j. lipid res. 36
(1995) 611–621.
[172] f.m. platt, g.r. neises, g.b. karlsson, r.a. dwek, t.d. butters, j. biol.
chem. 269 (1994) 27108–27114.
[173] s.s. liour, r.k. yu, neurochem. res. 27 (2002) 1507–1512.
[174] n.s. radin, j.a. shayman, j. inokuchi, adv. lipid res. 26 (1993)
183–213.
[175] y. lavie, h. cao, a. volner, a. lucci, t.y. han, v. geffen, a.e.
giuliano, m.c. cabot, j. biol. chem. 272 (1997) 1682–1687.
[176] p.d. eckford, f.j. sharom, biochem. j. 389 (2005) 517–526.
[177] h. sprong, b. kruithof, r. leijendekker, j.w. slot, g. van meer, p. van
der sluijs, j. biol. chem. 273 (1998) 25880–25888.
[211] t. fontaine, t. magnin, a. melhert, d. lamont, j.p. latge, m.a.
ferguson, glycobiology 13 (2003) 169–177.
[212] h. nygren, k. borner, b. hagenhoff, p. malmberg, j.e. mansson,
biochim. biophys. acta 1737 (2005) 102–110.
[213] j.c. holthuis, t. pomorski, r.j. raggers, h. sprong, g. van meer,
physiol. rev. 81 (2001) 1689–1723.
[214] d.l. marks, r.e. pagano, trends cell biol. 12 (2002) 605–613.
[215] t. ait slimane, d. hoekstra, febs lett. 529 (2002) 54–59.
[216] a.h. futerman, biochim. biophys. acta (2006).
[217] k. hanada, k. kumagai, s. yasuda, y. miura, m. kawano, m. fukasawa,
m. nishijima, nature 426 (2003) 803–809.
[218] k. kumagai, s. yasuda, k. okemoto, m. nishijima, s. kobayashi, k.
hanada, j. biol. chem. 280 (2005) 6488–6495.
[219] y.a. hannun, c.r. loomis, a.h. merrill jr., r.m. bell, j. biol. chem.
261 (1986) 12604–12609.
[178] h. sprong, s. degroote, t. nilsson, m. kawakita, n. ishida, p. van der
sluijs, g. van meer, mol. biol. cell 14 (2003) 3482–3493.
[220] a.h. merrill jr., a.m. sereni, v.l. stevens, y.a. hannun, r.m. bell, j.m.
kinkade jr., j. biol. chem. 261 (1986) 12610–12615.
[179] r. kabuss, a. ashikov, s. oelmann, r. gerardy-schahn, h. bakker,
glycobiology 15 (2005) 905–911.
[180] s.c. datta, n.s. radin, lipids 23 (1988) 508–510.
[181] y.a. hannun, r.m. bell, science 243 (1989) 500–507.
[182] r. harel, a.h. futerman, j. biol. chem. 268 (1993) 14476–14481.
[183] a. schwarz, e. rapaport, k. hirschberg, a.h. futerman, j. biol. chem.
270 (1995) 10990–10998.
[184] s. boldin, a.h. futerman, j. neurochem. 68 (1997) 882–885.
[221] e. wilson, m.c. olcott, r.m. bell, a.h. merrill jr., j.d. lambeth, j. biol.
chem. 261 (1986) 12616–12623.
[222] y.
igarashi, s. hakomori, t. toyokuni, b. dean, s. fujita, m.
sugimoto, t. ogawa, k. el-ghendy, e. racker, biochemistry 28 (1989)
6796–6800.
[223] a. hamaguchi, e. suzuki, k. murayama, t. fujimura, t. hikita, k.
iwabuchi, k. handa, d.a. withers, s.c. masters, h. fu, s. hakomori,
biochem. biophys. res. commun. 307 (2003) 589–594.
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
1883
[224] c.c. king, f.t. zenke, p.e. dawson, e.m. dutil, a.c. newton, b.a.
hemmings, g.m. bokoch, j. biol. chem. 275 (2000) 18108–18113.
[225] y. ma, s. pitson, t. hercus, j. murphy, a. lopez, j. woodcock, j. biol.
chem. 280 (2005) 26011–26017.
[226] o.b. mcdonald, y.a. hannun, c.h. reynolds, n. sahyoun, j. biol.
chem. 266 (1991) 21773–21776.
[227] c. grimm, r. kraft, g. schultz, c. harteneck, mol. pharmacol. 67 (2005)
798–805.
[228] m. yasukochi, a. uehara, s. kobayashi, j.r. berlin, pflugers arch. 445
(2003) 665–673.
[229] a. titievsky, i. titievskaya, m. pasternack, k. kaila, k. tornquist, j.
biol. chem. 273 (1998) 242–247.
[230] l.j. siskind, s. fluss, m. bui, m. colombini, j. bioenerg. biomembr. 37
(2005) 227–236.
[231] s.w. paugh, m.p. cassidy, h. he, s. milstien, l.j. sim-selley, s. spiegel,
d.e. selley, mol. pharmacol. (2006).
[232] k. liu, x. zhang, c. sumanasekera, r.l. lester, r.c. dickson, biochem.
soc. trans. 33 (2005) 1170–1173.
[233] s. spiegel, biochim. biophys. acta (2006).
[234] s. milstien, s. spiegel, cancer cell 9 (2006) 148–150.
[235] k. mizugishi, t. yamashita, a. olivera, g.f. miller, s. spiegel, r.l.
proia, mol. cell. biol. 25 (2005) 11113–11121.
[236] p.s. jolly, h.m. rosenfeldt, s. milstien, s. spiegel, mol. immunol. 38
(2002) 1239–1245.
[237] v.l. stevens, s. nimkar, w.c. jamison, d.c. liotta, a.h. merrill jr.,
biochim. biophys. acta 1051 (1990) 37–45.
[238] e. kostenis, j. cell. biochem. 92 (2004) 923–936.
[239] v.s. kamanna, b.v. bassa, s.h. ganji, d.d. roh, histol. histopathol. 20
(2005) 603–613.
[240] f.a. mathieson, g.f. nixon, br. j. pharmacol. 147 (2006) 351–359.
[241] t. goldkorn, k.a. dressler, j. muindi, n.s. radin, j. mendelsohn, d.
menaldino, d. liotta, r.n. kolesnick, j. biol. chem. 266 (1991)
16092–16097.
[242] y.a. hannun, l.m. obeid, r.a. wolff, adv. lipid res. 25 (1993) 43–64.
[243] r.t. dobrowsky, c. kamibayashi, m.c. mumby, y.a. hannun, j. biol.
chem. 268 (1993) 15523–15530.
[244] c.e. chalfant, k. kishikawa, m.c. mumby, c. kamibayashi, a.
bielawska, y.a. hannun, j. biol. chem. 274 (1999) 20313–20317.
[245] a. bielawska, h.m. crane, d. liotta, l.m. obeid, y.a. hannun, j. biol.
chem. 268 (1993) 26226–26232.
[246] b.j. pettus, c.e. chalfant, y.a. hannun, biochim. biophys. acta 1585
(2002) 114–125.
[247] r.m. ray, s. bhattacharya, l.r. johnson, j. biol. chem. 280 (2005)
31091–31100.
[248] p.p. ruvolo, x. deng, t. ito, b.k. carr, w.s. may, j. biol. chem. 274
(1999) 20296–20300.
[249] c.w. chiang, c. kanies, k.w. kim, w.b. fang, c. parkhurst, m. xie, t.
henry, e. yang, mol. cell. biol. 23 (2003) 6350–6362.
[250] m. xin, x. deng, j. biol. chem. 281 (2006) 18859–18867.
[251] c.l. chen, c.f. lin, c.w. chiang, m.s. jan, y.s. lin, mol. pharmacol.
70 (2006) 510–517.
[252] c.e. chalfant, k. rathman, r.l. pinkerman, r.e. wood, l.m. obeid, b.
ogretmen, y.a. hannun, j. biol. chem. 277 (2002) 12587–12595.
[253] y. zhang, b. yao, s. delikat, s. bayoumy, x.h. lin, s. basu, m.
mcginley, p.y. chan-hui, h. lichenstein, r. kolesnick, cell 89 (1997)
63–72.
[254] b. yao, y. zhang, s. delikat, s. mathias, s. basu, r. kolesnick, nature
378 (1995) 307–310.
[255] f. yan, d.b. polk, cancer res. 61 (2001) 963–969.
[256] f. yan, s.k. john, d.b. polk, cancer res. 61 (2001) 8668–8675.
[257] m. zhou, d.a. horita, d.s. waugh, r.a. byrd, d.k. morrison, j. mol.
biol. 315 (2002) 435–446.
[258] t. kajimoto, y. shirai, n. sakai, t. yamamoto, h. matsuzaki, u.
kikkawa, n. saito, j. biol. chem. 279 (2004) 12668–12676.
[259] a. aschrafi, r. franzen, s. shabahang, d. fabbro, j. pfeilschifter, a.
huwiler, biochim. biophys. acta 1634 (2003) 30–39.
[260] k. kashiwagi, y. shirai, m. kuriyama, n. sakai, n. saito, j. biol. chem.
277 (2002) 18037–18045.
[261] k.p. becker, k. kitatani, j. idkowiak-baldys, j. bielawski, y.a. hannun,
j. biol. chem. 280 (2005) 2606–2612.
[262] k.p. becker, y.a. hannun, j. biol. chem. 278 (2003) 52747–52754.
[263] g. wang, j. silva, k. krishnamurthy, e. tran, b.g. condie, e. bieberich,
j. biol. chem. 280 (2005) 26415–26424.
[264] j. lozano, e. berra, m.m. municio, m.t. diaz-meco, i. dominguez, l.
sanz, j. moscat, j. biol. chem. 269 (1994) 19200–19202.
[265] m.m. municio, j. lozano, p. sanchez, j. moscat, m.t. diaz-meco, j.
biol. chem. 270 (1995) 15884–15891.
[266] m. heinrich, m. wickel, w. schneider-brachert, c. sandberg, j. gahr, r.
schwandner, t. weber, p. saftig, c. peters, j. brunner, m. kronke, s.
schutze, embo j. 18 (1999) 5252–5263.
[267] m. heinrich, m. wickel, s. winoto-morbach, w. schneider-brachert, t.
weber, j. brunner, p. saftig, c. peters, m. kronke, s. schutze, adv. exp.
med. biol. 477 (2000) 305–315.
[268] m. heinrich, j. neumeyer, m. jakob, c. hallas, v. tchikov, s. winoto-
morbach, m. wickel, w. schneider-brachert, a. trauzold, a. hethke, s.
schutze, cell death differ. 11 (2004) 550–563.
[269] a. huwiler, c. xin, a.k. brust, v.a. briner, j. pfeilschifter, biochim.
biophys. acta 1636 (2004) 159–168.
[270] y. hannun, biochim. biophys. acta (2006).
[271] r.n. kolesnick, f.m. goni, a. alonso, j. cell. physiol. 184 (2000)
285–300.
[272] h. grassme, a. jekle, a. riehle, h. schwarz, j. berger, k. sandhoff, r.
kolesnick, e. gulbins, j. biol. chem. 276 (2001) 20589–20596.
[273] n. cahuzac, w. baum, v. kirkin, f. conchonaud, l. wawrezinieck, d.
marguet, o. janssen, m. zornig, a.o. hueber, blood (2005).
[274] a.b. abdel shakor, k. kwiatkowska, a. sobota, j. biol. chem. 279
(2004) 36778–36787.
[275] j.a. rotolo, j. zhang, m. donepudi, h. lee, z. fuks, r. kolesnick, j.
biol. chem. (2005).
[276] m. garcia-marcos, e. perez-andres, s. tandel, u. fontanils, a. kumps,
e. kabre, a. gomez-munoz, a. marino, j.p. dehaye, s. pochet, j. lipid
res. (2006).
[277] h.w. huang, e.m. goldberg, r. zidovetzki, biochem. biophys. res.
commun. 220 (1996) 834–838.
[278] a. gomez-munoz, biochim. biophys. acta (2006).
[279] a. gomez-munoz, p.a. duffy, a. martin, l. o'brien, h.s. byun, r.
bittman, d.n. brindley, mol. pharmacol. 47 (1995) 833–839.
[280] a. gomez-munoz, j.y. kong, b. salh, u.p. steinbrecher, j. lipid res. 45
(2004) 99–105.
[281] a. gomez-munoz, j.y. kong, k. parhar, s.w. wang, p. gangoiti, m.
gonzalez, s. eivemark, b. salh, v. duronio, u.p. steinbrecher, febs
lett. 579 (2005) 3744–3750.
[282] b.j. pettus, a. bielawska, s. spiegel, p. roddy, y.a. hannun, c.e.
chalfant, j. biol. chem. 278 (2003) 38206–38213.
[283] b.j. pettus, a. bielawska, p. subramanian, d.s. wijesinghe, m.
maceyka, c.c. leslie, j.h. evans, j. freiberg, p. roddy, y.a. hannun,
c.e. chalfant, j. biol. chem. 279 (2004) 11320–11326.
[284] b.j. pettus, c.e. chalfant, y.a. hannun, curr. mol. med. 4 (2004)
405–418.
[285] h. wang, a.g. charles, a.j. frankel, m.c. cabot, urology 61 (2003)
1047–1052.
[286] a. erdreich-epstein, l.b. tran, n.n. bowman, h. wang, m.c. cabot, d.
l. durden, j. vlckova, c.p. reynolds, m.f. stins, s. groshen, m.
millard, j. biol. chem. 277 (2002) 49531–49537.
[287] q. jiang, b.n. ames, faseb j. 17 (2003) 816–822.
[288] a. schulz, t. mousallem, m. venkataramani, d.a. persaud-sawin, a.
zucker, c. luberto, a. bielawska, j. bielawski, j.c. holthuis, s.m.
jazwinski, l. kozhaya, g.s. dbaibo, r.m. boustany, j. biol. chem. 281
(2006) 2784–2794.
[289] h.l. brockman, m.m. momsen, r.e. brown, l. he, j. chun, h.s. byun,
r. bittman, biophys. j. 87 (2004) 1722–1731.
[290] f.x. contreras, g. basanez, a. alonso, a. herrmann, f.m. goni,
biophys. j. 88 (2005) 348–359.
[291] j. stiban, d. fistere, m. colombini, apoptosis 11 (2006) 773–780.
[292] t. yorimitsu, d.j. klionsky, cell death differ. 12 (suppl. 2) (2005)
1542–1552.
1884
w. zheng et al. / biochimica et biophysica acta 1758 (2006) 1864–1884
[293] a.m. cuervo, mol. cell. biochem. 263 (2004) 55–72.
[294] b. levine, cell 120 (2005) 159–162.
[295] c. munz, cell. microbiol. 8 (2006) 891–898.
[296] t. shintani, d.j. klionsky, science 306 (2004) 990–995.
[297] s. pattingre, b. levine, cancer res. 66 (2006) 2885–2888.
[298] g. kroemer, m. jaattela, nat. rev., cancer 5 (2005) 886–897.
[299] m.s. ricci, w.x. zong, oncologist 11 (2006) 342–357.
[300] s. daido, t. kanzawa, a. yamamoto, h. takeuchi, y. kondo, s. kondo,
cancer res. 64 (2004) 4286–4293.
[301] f. scarlatti, c. bauvy, a. ventruti, g. sala, f. cluzeaud, a. vandewalle,
r. ghidoni, p. codogno, j. biol. chem. 279 (2004) 18384–18391.
[302] p.o. seglen, p.b. gordon, proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 79 (1982)
1889–1892.
[303] y. kabeya, n. mizushima, t. ueno, a. yamamoto, t. kirisako, t. noda,
e. kominami, y. ohsumi, t. yoshimori, embo j. 19 (2000) 5720–5728.
[304] g. lavieu, f. scarlatti, g. sala, s. carpentier, t. levade, r. ghidoni, j.
botti, p. codogno, j. biol. chem. 281 (2006) 8518–8527.
[305] c. bedia, g. triola, j. casas, a. llebaria, g. fabrias, org. biomol. chem.
3 (2005) 3707–3712.
[306] t. kanzawa, l. zhang, l. xiao, i.m. germano, y. kondo, s. kondo,
oncogene 24 (2005) 980–991.
[307] x. zeng, j.h. overmeyer, w.a. maltese, j. cell sci. 119 (2006)
259–270.
[308] h. zhou, s.a. summers, m.j. birnbaum, r.n. pittman, j. biol. chem.
273 (1998) 16568–16575.
[309] k.m. schubert, m.p. scheid, v. duronio, j. biol. chem. 275 (2000)
13330–13335.
[310] a. petiot, e. ogier-denis, e.f. blommaart, a.j. meijer, p. codogno, j.
biol. chem. 275 (2000) 992–998.
[311] s. jayadev, b. liu, a.e. bielawska, j.y. lee, f. nazaire, m. pushkareva,
l.m. obeid, y.a. hannun, j. biol. chem. 270 (1995) 2047–2052.
[312] y. uchiyama, arch. histol. cytol. 64 (2001) 233–246.
[313] m. lamparska-przybysz, b. gajkowska, t. motyl, j. physiol. pharmacol.
56 (suppl. 3) (2005) 159–179.