the journal of comparative neurology 497:622– 635 (2006)
survival of interneurons and parallel
fiber synapses in a cerebellar cortex
deprived of purkinje cells: studies in the
double mutant mouse grid2lc/ⴙ;baxⴚ/ⴚ
s. hadi zanjani,1 fekrije selimi,1 michael w. vogel,3
anne-marie haeberle´ ,2 julien boeuf,2 jean mariani,1
and yannick j. bailly2
1equipe de´veloppement et vieillissement du syste`me nerveux, umr npa 7102 cnrs et
univ. p. & m. curie, 75005 paris, france
2neurotransmission et se´cre´tion neuroendocrine, cnrs umr 7168 inci et univ.
l. pasteur, ifr 37 des neurosciences, 67084 strasbourg, france
3maryland psychiatric research center, university of maryland medical school,
baltimore, maryland 21228, usa
abstract
the lurcher mutation in the grid2 gene causes the cell autonomous death of virtually all
cerebellar purkinje cells and the target-related death of 90% of the granule cells and 60–75%
of the olivary neurons. inactivation of bax, a pro-apoptotic gene of the bcl-2 family, in
heterozygous lurcher mutants (grid2lc/⫹) rescues ⬃60% of the granule cells, but does not
rescue purkinje or olivary neurons. given the larger size of the cerebellar molecular layer in
grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ double mutants compared to grid2lc/⫹ mutants, we analyzed the survival
of the stellate and basket interneurons as well as the synaptic connectivity of parallel ﬁbers
originating from the surviving granule cells in the absence of their purkinje cell targets in the
grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ cerebellum. quantiﬁcation showed a signiﬁcantly higher density of inter-
neurons (⬃60%) in the molecular layer of the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ mice compared to grid2lc/⫹,
suggesting that interneurons are subject to a bax-dependent target-related death in the
lurcher mutants. furthermore, electron microscopy showed the normal ultrastructural
aspect of a number of parallel ﬁbers in the molecular layer of the grid2lc/⫹; bax⫺/⫺ double
mutant mice and preserved their numerous synaptic contacts on interneurons, suggesting
that interneurons could play a trophic role for axon terminals of surviving granule cells.
finally, parallel ﬁbers varicosities in the double mutant established “pseudo-synapses” on
glia as well as displayed autophagic proﬁles, suggesting that the connections established by
the parallel ﬁbers in the absence of their purkinje cell targets were subject to a high turnover
involving autophagy. j. comp. neurol. 497:622–635, 2006.
© 2006 wiley-liss, inc.
indexing terms: cerebellum; neuronal death; interneuron; synapse; autophagy
studies of cerebellar mutant mice have brought major
insights into the mechanisms of cerebellar development
and neuronal degeneration. molecular studies have estab-
lished that the lurcher mutation is a gain-of-function
mutation caused by a base pair change in the ␦2 gluta-
mate receptor gene (grid2) that greatly increases its con-
ductance by turning the receptor into a leaky ion channel
(zuo et al., 1997). the expression of the lurcher gene in
heterozygous (grid2lc/⫹) mutants induces the early post-
natal death of virtually all purkinje cells, 60–75% of the
olivary neurons, and 90% of the granule cells starting
after the ﬁrst week of postnatal development (phillips,
1960; caddy and biscoe, 1979; norman et al., 1995; yue et
© 2006 wiley-liss, inc.
al., 2002; selimi et al., 2003). purkinje cell and granule
cell counts in mutant wild type chimeras and inbred mice
grant sponsor: national institute of health; grant number: ns34309 (to
m.w.v., j.m.).
*correspondence to: yannick bailly, neurotransmission et se´cre´tion
neuroendocrine, cnrs upr umr 7168 inci et univ. l. pasteur, 5, rue
blaise pascal, 67084 strasbourg, france.
e-mail: byan@neurochem.u-strasbg.fr
received 4 march 2005; revised 17 august 2005; accepted 3 march 2006
doi 10.1002/cne.21017
published online in wiley interscience (www.interscience.wiley.com).
the journal of comparative neurology. doi 10.1002/cne
interneurons and parallel fiber synapses
have demonstrated that purkinje cell and granule cell
numbers are tightly correlated (wetts and herrup, 1983;
herrup and sunter, 1987; vogel et al., 1989). indeed,
studies of grid2lc/⫹ wild type chimeras demonstrated
that grid2lc/⫹ purkinje cell death is cell autonomous,
whereas the granule cells and the olivary neurons die
because of the loss of their target neurons, the purkinje
cells (wetts and herrup, 1982a,b). although granule cell
numbers appear to be regulated by interactions with pur-
kinje cells, it is not clear how purkinje cell numbers are
regulated at the level of either the size of the progenitor
pool or the number of descendants in the progenitor lin-
eages (wetts and herrup, 1982c; vogel and herrup, 1993;
baader et al., 1996; mathis et al., 1997; hawkes et al.,
1998). evidence for naturally occurring cell death among
purkinje cells has been obtained in the cerebellum of
transgenic mice overexpressing the anti-apoptotic bcl-2
gene that displayed increased purkinje cell and granule
cell numbers (zanjani et al., 1996, 1997, 2004). because
the transgene is expressed in purkinje cells but not in
granule cells in vivo, purkinje cells are likely to be rescued
from cell death by the increased concentration of bcl-2,
whereas the granule cell number is increased indirectly
due to the higher number of target neurons, i.e., purkinje
cells.
the deletion of bax, a pro-apoptotic gene of the bcl-2
family, has been shown to reduce the incidence of natu-
rally occurring neuronal death in vivo (deckwerth et al.,
1996; white et al., 1998). the numbers of purkinje cells
are also increased in the cerebellum of bax knockout mice,
supporting the hypothesis that the period of naturally
occurring cell death that regulates purkinje cell popula-
tion could depend critically on the ratio of pro-apoptotic
bax to anti-apoptotic bcl-2 proteins (fan et al., 2001).
studies of cerebellar mutants indicate that the number
of granule cells is regulated strongly by interactions with
purkinje cells through the regulation of both granule cell
genesis and survival (sotelo and changeux, 1974; caddy
and biscoe, 1979; sonmez and herrup, 1984; messner et
al., 1988; smeyne et al., 1995). granule cell proliferation
declines after purkinje cell death or arrest in purkinje cell
differentiation during granule cell genesis, indicating that
purkinje cells stimulate granule cell proliferation (son-
mez and herrup, 1984; smeyne et al., 1995). sonic hedge-
hog released by purkinje cells could mediate this effect
(dahmane and ruiz-i-altaba, 1999; wallace, 1999;
wechsler-reya and scott, 1999). moreover, the death or
absence of purkinje cells during early development causes
massive granule cell death, indicating that survival of
granule cells depends on their purkinje cell targets. gran-
ule cells have further been shown to undergo a period of
naturally occurring cell death around postnatal day 20
(caddy and biscoe, 1979). in the bax knockout mice, how-
ever, the number of granule cells remains unchanged com-
pared with wild type controls (fan et al., 2001), suggesting
that bax is not an obligate participant in naturally occur-
ring cell death of granule cells, thus raising further ques-
tions about how granule cell numbers are regulated. in
the lurcher (grid2lc/⫹) mutant mouse, the inactivation of
bax does not rescue intrinsic purkinje cell death and
target-related cell death of olivary neurons. in contrast,
about 70% of granule cells are rescued from target-related
cell death, suggesting that bax plays an important role for
this process in granule cells (selimi et al., 2000).
623
the complete lack of purkinje cells in a quasi-normal
histological structure is an obvious abnormal feature of
the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ cerebellar cortex (selimi et al.,
2000). this led us to question whether, in addition to
granule cells, the survival of other neurons was affected in
the cerebellar cortex of the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ mice. an-
other interesting question was to analyze the connectivity
of the many surviving neurons in the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺
cerebellum in the absence of their main targets, the pur-
kinje cells. for this purpose, we performed a quantitative
analysis of other parallel ﬁber targets that presumably
survive in the molecular layer of the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺
double mutant mice, i.e., the stellate and basket interneu-
rons. in addition, using transmission electron microscopy
and gaba-speciﬁc postembedding immunogold, we ana-
lyzed what kinds of synapse were maintained in the cer-
ebellar cortex of the purkinje cell-deprived double mutant.
materials and methods
animals
grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ double mutants were generated by
heterozygous mating of grid2lc/⫹ (b6akr strain) and
bax⫺/⫺ mutants in our animal facilities. the bax⫺/⫺
mutants (c57bl6/rw-4 strain) were initially kindly pro-
vided by dr. stanley korsmeyer (washington university,
st. louis, mo). the bax⫺/⫺ mutant was generated by
homologous recombination to delete exons 2–5 to make a
nonfunctional protein (knudson et al., 1995). in the mat-
ing scheme to generate homozygous and heterozygous
double mutants, grid2lc/⫹ males were ﬁrst mated with
bax⫹/⫺ heterozygous females. the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫹/⫺
were then intercrossed (selimi et al., 2000). all animals
were maintained and used with maximum care to mini-
mize their suffering in accordance with nih guidelines
(nih publication 80-23, revised 1996) and the european
communities council directive of 24 november 1986 (86/
609/eec).
tissue preparation, quantitative
measurements, and statistics
adult grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ (n ⫽ 3), bax⫺/⫺ (n ⫽ 3)
grid2lc/⫹ (n ⫽ 4), and wildtype (n ⫽ 4) mice were deeply
anesthetized and perfused with a mixture of aldehydes.
parasagittal sections (1 mm) of cerebellar vermis and
hemispheres were cut with a vibrating microtome, osmi-
cated, dehydrated, and embedded in araldite. one block (1
mm3) was sampled in the cortex of two different folia
(v–vi and ix) of one randomly selected vermal section
from each animal. from each block of cortex, three semi-
thin sections (1 ␮m) spaced by 100 ␮m were selected for
gill’s hematoxylin staining and for postembedding silver-
intensiﬁed immunogold detection of gaba. basket and
stellate interneuron density was evaluated by counting
both the hematoxylin-stained nuclei and the gaba-
immunolabeled cell bodies in 10 areas (2,500 ␮m2/area)
selected randomly in the molecular layer. one block was
sampled randomly in hemisphere sections of each geno-
type (1 block/animal). semithin sections were cut in these
blocks and submitted to the staining methods described
above for the vermal sections.
a computer-linked microscope and nih image software
were used to measure the thickness of the molecular layer
in 100 areas selected randomly in hematoxylin-stained
624
semithin sections cut in the cerebellar cortex of each ani-
mal. the values from each animal were averaged.
the mean values of the molecular layer thickness and
in bax⫺/⫺;grid2lc/⫹, bax⫺/⫺,
interneurons densities
grid2lc/⫹ were calculated and compared to those obtained
in wild type mice using student-newman-keuls test.
electron microscopy (em)
ultrathin sections were obtained from each block of
cerebellar cortex and were counterstained with uranyl
acetate before examination with a hitachi 7500 tem.
based on current ultrastructural criteria (larramendi
and victor, 1967), presynaptic parallel ﬁber boutons were
identiﬁed by their small size and the concentration of
pleomorphic small vesicles at the active zone of the syn-
apse with the dense membrane of the postsynaptic proﬁle
(i.e., purkinje cell branchlet spine, basket and stellate cell
soma, and dendrites). climbing ﬁber-purkinje cell syn-
apses were recognized as large gaba-negative varicosi-
ties ﬁlled with a dense accumulation of rounded vesicles
making asymmetric synapses on postsynaptic proﬁles in
the molecular and the purkinje cell layers (i.e., large
thorns of the purkinje cell dendritic shafts, basket and
stellate cell soma, and dendrites). in the glomeruli formed
by climbing and mossy ﬁbers with the granule cell den-
drites in the internal granular layer, the high packing
density of clear vesicles and the few dense-cored vesicles
visible in the climbing ﬁber terminals made them distin-
guishable from the varicosities of mossy ﬁber terminals
(caddy and biscoe, 1979; see results). the ultrastructural
criteria established by lemkey-johnston and larramendi
(1968) were used to identify the varicosities of basket and
stellate axons making inhibitory synapses on basket and
stellate cell somata and dendrites.
gill’s hematoxylin staining
after removal of the araldite embedding by immersion
in sodium ethanolate (1 hour) and rinsing in ethanol, the
semithin sections were plunged in 0.05 m phosphate
buffer (pb, ph 7, 5 minutes). the sections were then
rinsed with distilled water and treated with 0.2 m
phosphate-buffered (ph 4) citric acid (5 minutes). follow-
ing tap water rinsing, the sections were stained in gill’s
hematoxylin for 20 minutes and rinsed again in tap water
(30 minutes) before dehydration in graded ethanol and
mounting in eukitt.
postembedding immunogold for detection
of gaba
semithin and ultrathin sections from each animal were
submitted to detection of gaba according to a standard
postembedding immunogold protocol
(debiasi et al.,
1994). brieﬂy, the semithin sections were immersed in 1%
sodium borohydride (15 minutes) and after several rinses
in distilled water, in 0.1 m pb containing 0.1% tween20
(pbt). following incubation in pbt containing 3 mg/ml
l-lysine (30 minutes), the sections were incubated with
afﬁnity-puriﬁed anti-gaba polyclonal antibody developed
in rabbit using gaba-bsa as the immunogen (sigma, st.
louis, mo, #a-2052, lot 027h4823, 0.1 ␮g/ml; overnight
at 4°c). the anti-gaba speciﬁcity was characterized by
the manufacturer in a dot blot assay yielding positive
binding with gaba and gaba-klh and negative binding
with bsa. the tissue-bound antibodies were then detected
the journal of comparative neurology. doi 10.1002/cne
s.h. zanjani et al.
using a silver-intensiﬁed ultrasmall gold conjugate f(ab)
of goat antirabbit igg (aurion, the netherlands) accord-
ing to the manufacturer’s protocol and mounted for light
microscopy (kit r-gent se-lm, aurion) after counter-
staining in toluidine blue.
the ultrathin sections were immersed in 1% sodium
borohydride (15 minutes) and after several rinses in dis-
tilled water and 0.05 m tris-buffered saline (tbs, ph 7.4),
incubated at room temperature with 10% normal goat
serum (ngs) in tbs (30 minutes) and then with the
gaba-speciﬁc primary antiserum (0.5 mg/ml; overnight
at 4°c) in tbs containing 1% ngs. the sections were
extensively rinsed in tbs and incubated at room temper-
ature in a solution of goat antirabbit igg coupled to 15 nm
gold particles (aurion) diluted 1/200 in tbs containing 1%
ngs (3.5 hours). following extensive rinses in tbs and
then in distilled water, the sections were counterstained
with 1% uranyl acetate (10 minutes). substitution of the
primary antiserum with supernatant of centrifuged anti-
gaba antibodies preadsorbed with gaba (0.1–1 ␮m),
preimmune serum, or tbs abolished labeling in both
semithin and ultrathin sections, as did omission of gold-
conjugated secondary antibodies. axonal varicosities es-
tablishing asymmetric synapses were always devoid of
labeling. nonspeciﬁc or background labeling was very low
in our preparations.
digital images
digital photomicrographs and electron micrographs
were stored using zeiss axiovision (light microscopy) and
advanced microscopy techniques (amt, danvers, ma;
electron microscopy) softwares. photoshop 7.0 (adobe sys-
tems, san jose, ca) was used for ﬁnal adjustments of
contrast and brightness in all pictures.
results
cerebellar cortex of the baxⴚ/ⴚ mutant
mouse
morphometric analysis showed that the thickness of the
molecular layer of the bax⫺/⫺ (154 ⫾ 7 ␮m; fig. 1a) and
the wildtype (155 ⫾ 2 ␮m; fig. 1d) mice was not signiﬁ-
cantly different (p ⬎ 0.05). in the cerebellar cortex of both
bax⫺/⫺ (fig. 1e) and wildtype (fig. 1h) mice, gaba
immunoreactivity labeled the cell bodies of stellate and
basket interneurons in the molecular layer and of golgi
neurons in the granular layer. in addition, tiny immuno-
labeled proﬁles resembling axon varicosities were seen
throughout the cortical neuropile. the basal part of the
purkinje cell soma was surrounded by strongly immuno-
labeled pinceau made by basket cell axon terminals in the
bax⫺/⫺ and the wild type mice (fig. 1e,h). cell counts in
both hematoxylin and gaba-immunostained sections
showed that the molecular layer contained similar densi-
ties of interneurons (number of interneurons / 2,500 ␮m2)
in the cerebellum of the bax⫺/⫺ (mean ⫽ 2 ⫾ 0, n ⫽ 3) and
wildtype (mean ⫽ 2 ⫾ 0, n ⫽ 4) mice (p ⬎ 0.05; fig. 2).
albeit not assessed quantitatively, interneuron distribu-
tion in the cerebellar hemispheres appeared similar as in
the vermis (not shown).
ultrastructural examination of the cerebellar cortex of
the wild type and bax⫺/⫺ (fig. 3a,b,e) mice did not
disclose obvious differences.
the journal of comparative neurology. doi 10.1002/cne
interneurons and parallel fiber synapses
625
fig. 1. gill’s hematoxylin (a–d) and gaba-immunogold (e–h)
staining of semithin sections of the cerebellar cortex of bax⫺/⫺ (a,e),
grid2lc/⫹ (b,f), grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ (c,g), and wild type (d,h) mice.
the purkinje cell layer (asterisks) is present in the cerebellum of the
bax⫺/⫺ (a,e) and the wildtype (d,h) mice; it has disappeared in the
cerebellum of grid2lc/⫹ (b,f) and grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ (c,g) mice. the
grid2lc/⫹ molecular layer (ml) is much atrophied (b,f) and displays
rare gaba-immunostained interneurons (arrowheads in f). the
bax⫺/⫺ (a,e) molecular layer looks like the wild type’s (d,h) with
purkinje cell dendrites (arrows in a,d) and gaba-immunostained
interneurons (arrowheads in e,h). see in both cases (e,h) the gaba-
immunostained proﬁles including basket cell pinceaux (white arrows)
at
the base of purkinje cell somata. g: many more gaba-
immunostained interneurons are visible in the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ mo-
lecular layer than in the other cases (e,f,h). the internal granular
layer (igl) of the bax⫺/⫺ (a), grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ (c), and the wild type
(d) mice display normal granule cell densities, whereas most of the
granule cells are lacking in the internal granular layer of the
grid2lc/⫹ mouse (b). golgi interneurons (white arrowheads) display
gaba-immunostaining in the igl of all mice. a–d: 500⫻, e–h:
520⫻. scale bars ⫽ 50 ␮m.
cerebellar cortex of the grid2lc/ⴙ mutant
mouse
the thickness of the molecular layer was signiﬁcantly
reduced by 78% in the grid2lc/⫹ mice (34 ⫾ 2 ␮m; fig. 1b)
when compared to the wildtype mice (155 ⫾ 2 ␮m; fig. 1d;
p ⬍ 0.01), but similar densities of interneurons were
found in the molecular layer of the grid2lc/⫹ (mean ⫽ 2 ⫾
0, n ⫽ 4; fig. 1b,f), bax⫺/⫺ (mean ⫽ 2 ⫾ 0, n ⫽ 3; fig.
1a,e) and wild type (mean ⫽ 2 ⫾ 0, n ⫽ 4; fig. 1d,h) mice
(fig. 2; p ⬎ 0.05). taken together, these results show a
loss of stellate and basket interneurons in the cerebellum
of the grid2lc/⫹ mice.
as expected, the ultrastructure of the grid2lc/⫹ cerebel-
lar cortex, where purkinje cells and most of the other
neurons have degenerated, displayed many abnormal as-
pects. as a common feature of the grid2lc/⫹ cerebellar
cortex, the neuropile was invested with hypertrophied
glial cell processes (fig. 3c,d,f). many of the few remain-
ing neuronal elements were surrounded by abundant, su-
perimposed wraps of glial processes. these neuronal ele-
ments included the somata and dendrites of interneurons,
bundles of nonmyelinated parallel ﬁber-like axons in the
molecular layer (fig. 3c,d), as well as golgi neuronal
proﬁles and cerebellar glomerulus in the internal granule
cell layer (fig. 3f). symmetric synapses made by stellate
and basket interneurons on dendrites of interneurons of
the same types (fig. 4d,e) could be recognized in the
neuropile of the grid2lc/⫹ molecular layer. asymmetric
626
fig. 2.
interneurons density in the molecular layer of the cerebel-
lum of wild type, grid2 lc/⫹; grid2 lc/⫹;bax ⫺/⫺ and bax⫺/⫺ mice. the
mean numbers of interneurons (⫾sem) were estimated in 2,500 ␮m2
of the molecular layer. a signiﬁcant increase in interneuron density is
observed in grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ mice, p ⬍ 0.0001.
synapses were made by the few remaining parallel ﬁbers
on the somato-dendritic compartments of stellate and bas-
ket interneurons (figs. 3c, 4a–d). some parallel ﬁber
varicosities contained small clusters of what resembled
synaptic vesicles at the membrane facing the surrounding
glia (fig. 3d). synaptic glomeruli in the internal granular
layer were composed of mossy and climbing ﬁber varicos-
ities and the terminals of golgi axons establishing, respec-
tively, asymmetric and symmetric synapses on the den-
drites of surviving granule cells and golgi neurons (figs.
3f, 4f).
cerebellar cortex of the (baxⴚ/ⴚ;grid2lc/ⴙ)
double mutant mouse
the thickness of the molecular layer was only reduced
by 39% in the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ mice (95 ⫾ 12 ␮m; fig.
1c) when compared to the control wild type mice (155 ⫾ 2
␮m; fig. 1d; p ⬍ 0.01). in addition to the absence of
purkinje cells in the cerebellar cortex of the grid2lc/⫹;
bax⫺/⫺ mouse, an apparent increase of the number of cell
bodies was disclosed in the molecular layer of the double
mutant (fig. 1c). cell counts in both hematoxylin- and
gaba-immunostained (fig. 1g) sections yielded corre-
sponding cell numbers, indicating that most if not all of
the supernumerary cells are gabaergic interneurons.
this conﬁrmed that the density of interneurons in the
cerebellar molecular layer of the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ double
mutant mouse (mean ⫽ 8 ⫾ 1, n ⫽ 3; figs. 1c,g, 2) was
increased signiﬁcantly when compared to grid2lc/⫹,
bax⫺/⫺ and wild type (mean ⫽ 2 ⫾ 0, n ⫽ 3–4/genotype,
figs. 1a,b,d–f,h, 2) mice (p ⬍ 0.0001). a similar increase
of interneuron numbers appeared to occur in the cerebel-
lar hemispheres as in the vermis, suggesting that the
difference between the double mutants and these mice
was not region-speciﬁc. degenerative aspects such as pic-
notic nuclei could not be seen throughout the cerebellar
cortex. these results show that bax inactivation prevents
the death of interneurons in lurcher mice.
in spite of the absence of purkinje cells in the cerebellar
cortex of the (grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺) double mutant mouse,
ultrastructural examination of
layer
showed that the numerous surviving granule cells have
developed parallel ﬁbers running in bundles close to stel-
late and basket interneurons. although to a much lesser
the molecular
the journal of comparative neurology. doi 10.1002/cne
s.h. zanjani et al.
extent than in the cerebellar cortex of the grid2lc/⫹ mu-
tants, abnormal, extensive wrapping of astrocytic pro-
cesses around neuronal proﬁles occurred in some places
(fig. 5a,b,d). parallel ﬁber varicosities established nu-
merous axo-somatic (figs. 5a, 6a) and axo-dendritic (figs.
5c,d, 6b–e) asymmetric synapses with basket and stel-
late interneurons. nevertheless, a substantial number of
parallel ﬁber varicosities displayed a swollen shape and
were surrounded either by glial cell processes (fig. 5b,c)
or by neuronal proﬁles (fig. 5c) without establishing syn-
aptic contacts. although devoid of postsynaptic target,
these boutons contained synaptic vesicles clustered be-
neath the axolemma-facing glia. a very interesting fea-
ture was the presence of osmiophilic membrane wraps and
autophagic-like vesicles with double membranes in many
of these boutons (figs. 5b, 6f,g) as well as in those
parallel ﬁber boutons making asymmetric synapses with
interneurons (fig. 6f,h,i). extensive examination of the
cerebellar cortex did not reveal any other degenerative
aspects. climbing ﬁber-like synapses on the dendrites of
interneurons were rare in the molecular layer but were
seen on the soma of gaba-immunostained interneurons
at the interface between the molecular and the internal
granular layers (fig. 7a,b). in the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ in-
ternal granular layer, the climbing ﬁber glomeruli estab-
lished asymmetric synapses on postsynaptic dendrites of
granule cells and on the somato-dendritic compartment of
golgi interneurons (fig. 8a). they displayed a normal
ultrastructural aspect with higher packing density of syn-
aptic vesicles (fig. 8a) than mossy ﬁber glomeruli (figs.
7f, 8b) in a manner similar to that observed in the inter-
nal granular layer of the wild type and the grid2lc/⫹ mice
(caddy and biscoe, 1979). although we did not quantify
the density of the climbing ﬁber terminals in this layer,
our qualitative analysis did not disclose any obvious dif-
frequency between the grid2lc/⫹ and the
ference of
grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ mice. these observations suggest that
the bax⫺/⫺-induced increase of granule cell density in the
fig. 3. ultrastructure of the cerebellar cortex of the bax⫺/⫺
(a,b,e) and the grid2lc/⫹ (c,d,f) mice. a: low magniﬁcation of the
neuropile in the bax⫺/⫺ molecular layer. arrows show synapses made
by parallel ﬁber varicosities on purkinje cell spines. parallel ﬁbers are
abundant (asterisks). g, glia; d, purkinje cell tertiary dendrite.
12,000⫻. b: high magniﬁcation of the neuropile in the bax⫺/⫺ molec-
ular layer. parallel ﬁber boutons (pf) make asymmetric synapses
(arrows) on purkinje cell spines (s). processes of glial astrocytes (g)
surround parallel ﬁbers (asterisk) and a naked purkinje cell spine
(arrowhead). 24,000⫻. c: in the grid2lc/⫹ molecular layer, bundles
made of few parallel ﬁbers (asterisks) run between abundant wraps of
glial processes (g). a few parallel ﬁber varicosities (pf) make asym-
metric synapses (arrows) on presumptive interneuron dendrites
(white asterisks). 27,000⫻. d: a parallel ﬁber bouton (pf) devoid of
postsynaptic target displays characteristic accumulation of synaptic
vesicles close to the axolemma (arrowhead) facing the surrounding
glia (g). asterisk shows a small bundle of parallel ﬁbers. 40,000⫻. e:
cerebellar glomerulus in the bax⫺/⫺ internal granular layer. a mossy
ﬁber varicosity (mf) ﬁlled with rounded, clear vesicles establishes
asymmetric synapses (arrows) with granule cell dendrites (gc). a
golgi axon terminal ﬁlled with pleomorphic vesicles makes symmetric
synapses (arrowheads) on two of these dendrites. g, glia. 39,000⫻. f:
cerebellar glomerulus wrapped in abundant superposed glial pro-
cesses (g) in the grid2lc/⫹ internal granular layer. see e for symbols.
white arrowhead points to a tight junction between a granule cell
dendrite (gc) and a glial process (g). 24,000⫻. scale bars ⫽ 1 ␮m in
a; 500 nm in b–f.
the journal of comparative neurology 1701 ldjdoz/cne
interneurons and parallel fiber synapses
628
the journal of comparative neurology. doi 10.1002/cne
s.h. zanjani et al.
fig. 4. ultrastructure of the cerebellar cortex of the grid2lc/⫹
mouse. a: stellate interneuron in the upper part of the molecular
layer. asterisks show parallel ﬁbers. arrow points to an axo-somatic
synapse made by a parallel ﬁber bouton on the stellate cell body. n,
nucleus. go, dictyosome of the golgi apparatus. 19,000⫻. b: high
magniﬁcation of the asymmetric axo-somatic synapse (arrow) shown
in a. pf, parallel ﬁber bouton; 35,000⫻. c: parallel ﬁber boutons (pf)
establish asymmetric axo-dendritic synapses (arrows) on the shaft (d)
and a spine (s) of a basket cell-like dendrite. asterisks, parallel ﬁbers;
33,000⫻. d: a parallel ﬁber presynaptic varicosity (pf) and a stellate
cell-like axon terminal (s) establish respectively an asymmetric (ar-
row) and a symmetric (arrowhead) axo-dendritic synapse with small
interneuron-like dendrites (d). 38,000⫻. e: axo-somatic symmetric
synapse (arrowhead) made by an interneuron-like axon terminal (ax)
on the soma of an interneuron (in). 40,000⫻. f: at the interface
between the molecular and the internal granular layers, a large
presynaptic varicosity resembling a climbing ﬁber terminal (cf) estab-
lishes asymmetric synapses (arrows) on golgi neuron dendrites
(god). unidentiﬁed presynaptic axon terminals (ax) make symmetric
synapses (arrowheads) on these dendrites. g, glial cell processes.
25,000⫻. a few dense-cored vesicles are visible among a majority of
clear synaptic vesicles in this varicosity. one of these dense-cored
vesicles (white arrowhead) seems to be fusing with the presynaptic
membrane at the synapse magniﬁed in the inset (g). 50,000⫻. scale
bars ⫽ 500 nm in a,c,d,f; 100 nm in b,e,g.
the journal of comparative neurology. doi 10.1002/cne
interneurons and parallel fiber synapses
629
fig. 5. ultrastructure of the molecular layer of the grid2lc/⫹;
bax⫺/⫺ mouse. a: stellate interneuron in the upper part of the mo-
lecular layer. asterisks show parallel ﬁbers. arrow points to an axo-
somatic synapse made by a parallel ﬁber bouton on the stellate cell
body. n, nucleus; g, glial cell processes. 10,000⫻. b: a parallel ﬁber
bouton (pf) is almost completely wrapped in glia (g). it contains
synaptic vesicles accumulated close to the cytoplasmic side of its
plasma membrane (arrowhead) and an abnormal membranous vacu-
ole (white arrowhead). 50,000⫻. c: two parallel ﬁber boutons (pf)
make asymmetric synapses (arrows) on a small interneuron dendrite-
like proﬁle (d). three other parallel ﬁber varicosities are surrounded
by parallel ﬁbers (asterisks) and glial processes (g). synaptic vesicles
accumulate close to the axolemma (arrowheads) facing the surround-
ing glia in two of them. 70,000⫻. d: a small interneuron-like dendrite
establishes an asymmetric synapse (arrow) and a symmetric synapse
(arrowhead), respectively, with a parallel ﬁber bouton (pf) and with a
presumptive interneuron axon terminal (ax). this synaptic assem-
blage is wrapped in processes of astrocytic glia (g). 48,000⫻. scale
bars ⫽ 500 nm in a,d; 100 nm in b,c.
the journal of comparative neurology d01 lojmz/cue
s.h. zanjani et al.
630
figure 6
the journal of comparative neurology. doi 10.1002/cne
interneurons and parallel fiber synapses
grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ cerebellar cortex had no signiﬁcant ef-
fect on climbing ﬁber development within the internal
granular layer.
in the molecular layer of the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ double
mutant, axon terminals of basket and stellate interneu-
rons established numerous symmetric synapses on the
soma (fig. 7c) and the dendrites (fig. 7d,e) of interneu-
rons of the same types. at these synapses, postembedding
immunogold strongly labeled the presynaptic gabaergic
varicosities, whereas the postsynaptic dendrites of the
interneurons often exhibited weaker but signiﬁcant label-
ing. also, the axon terminals of golgi neurons were
strongly immunolabeled at their symmetric synapses with
the postsynaptic granule cell dendrites in the glomeruli of
the internal granular layer (fig. 7f–h). in the internal
granular layer the ultrastructural features of the glomer-
ular synaptic complexes were conserved, in agreement
with the survival of the golgi interneurons, the mossy
ﬁbers, and the granule cells (figs. 7f, 8b).
discussion
the combination of the lurcher grid2lc/⫹ and the
bax⫺/⫺ mutations results in a unique model of cerebellar
cortex development, with early postnatal purkinje cell
death and a signiﬁcant population of surviving granule
cells (selimi et al., 2000). the molecular layer is also
relatively spared in the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ double mutant
and the results of our present study show that this may be
attributed to increased survival of molecular layer inter-
neurons and relatively normal-appearing interactions be-
tween granule cell parallel ﬁbers and basket and stellate
cells. however, our results also show that the surviving
interneurons do not represent a sufﬁcient target to the
surviving parallel ﬁbers, which also make “pseudo-
synapses” with the surrounding glia and show signs of
(pf)
fig. 6.
immunogold detection of gaba (a–e) and ultrastructural
abnormalities (f–i) in the molecular layer of the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺
mouse. a: axo-somatic synapses (arrows) made by two unlabeled
parallel ﬁber boutons (pf) on the gaba-immunolabeled soma of a
presumptive stellate interneuron that displays gaba-immunogold
particles in the upper part of the molecular layer. n, nucleus.
46,000⫻. b,c: asymmetric synapses (arrows) made by unlabeled par-
allel ﬁber-like boutons
on small gaba-immunolabeled
interneuron-like dendrites (d). b: 27,000⫻; c: 80,000⫻. d: asymmet-
ric synapse (arrow) made by an unlabeled parallel ﬁber-like varicosity
on a spine (s) emanating from a gaba-positive interneuron-like den-
drite (d). 37,000⫻. e: an interneuron-like dendrite (d) displays
gaba-immunogold labeling and establishes an asymmetric synapse
(arrow) with an unlabeled parallel ﬁber-like bouton (pf) and a sym-
metric synapse (arrowhead) with a gaba-immunolabeled basket cell-
like axon terminal (b) containing mitochondria, small pleomorphic
vesicles, and neuroﬁlaments. 28,000⫻. f: numerous parallel ﬁber
varicosities are visible in this area of the molecular layer. many of
these boutons contain abnormal autophagic-like membrane wraps
and double membrane vacuoles (arrowheads). 14,000⫻. g: double
membrane vacuoles (arrowheads) in nonsynaptic parallel ﬁber bou-
tons (pf). 70,000⫻. h: collapsing axolemma (arrowhead) of a parallel
ﬁber presynaptic varicosity (pf) making an asymmetric synapse (ar-
row) on an interneuron-like spine (s). 38,000⫻. i: dense corpuscle
made of membrane wraps (arrowhead) within a parallel ﬁber bouton
(pf) making an asymmetric synapse (arrow) on an interneuron-like
dendrite (d) at the interface between the molecular and the internal
granular layers. 28,000⫻. asterisks, parallel ﬁbers; g, glia. scale
bars ⫽ 500 nm in a,b,d,e,h,i; 100 nm in c,g; 1 ␮m in f.
remodeling, represented by autophagic proﬁles present in
the parallel ﬁber varicosities.
631
purkinje cell death-related death of
interneurons occurs in the molecular layer
of the grid2lc/ⴙ mouse in a bax-dependent
manner
our results showed a loss of basket and stellate inter-
neurons in the cerebellum of the mutant grid2lc/⫹ mouse.
such loss has not been previously reported, probably be-
cause the populations of cerebellar interneurons were
never analyzed quantitatively in the grid2lc/⫹ mouse
(caddy and biscoe, 1979). since there is no evidence that
the grid2 receptor is expressed in cerebellar interneurons,
this suggests that in lurcher the massive loss of purkinje
cells affects interneuron survival in a retrograde manner
through a target-related cell death mechanism. the pro-
apoptotic molecule bax has been shown to be expressed
by interneurons in the molecular layer of the wildtype and
grid2lc/⫹ mouse (wu¨ llner et al., 1998). counts of the
interneurons of the molecular layer (mostly basket and
stellate cells) in bax⫺/⫺ mutant and wild type mice did
not disclose any signiﬁcant variations in interneuron den-
sity. the volume of the cerebellar cortex and the thickness
of the molecular layer are not altered in bax⫺/⫺ mice.
these results indicate that bax does not directly inﬂu-
ence the survival of these interneurons during develop-
ment, nor does interneuron number respond to changes in
the number of purkinje cells due to deletion of bax expres-
sion (fan et al., 2001). however, our study shows a com-
bined increased molecular layer thickness and interneu-
ron density in the grid2lc/⫹:bax⫺/⫺ double mutant
compared to grid2lc/⫹ mutants, strongly suggesting that
deleting bax expression increases molecular layer inter-
neuron survival in the grid2lc/⫹:bax⫺/⫺ double mutant.
granule cells are stably rescued from purkinje cell target-
related death by the deletion of bax expression in the
grid2lc/⫹:bax⫺/⫺ mice. indeed, granule cell numbers re-
main stable from postnatal day (p)15 to p300 in the dou-
ble mutant (doughty et al., 2000). although we did not
estimate the total numbers of interneurons during this
whole period, our histological and ultrastructural analysis
of the cerebellar cortex of the adult double mutants did not
disclose any sign of interneuron degeneration, suggesting
that they are stably rescued. thus, the indirect pro-
apoptotic effect of the lurcher mutation on the interneu-
rons is suppressed by the absence of bax such that the
interneurons are no longer dependent on their purkinje
cell targets for survival.
connectivity in a cerebellum lacking
purkinje cells
in the grid2lc/⫹ mouse, the climbing ﬁbers have been
shown to abort somato-dendritic translocation on the pur-
kinje cells at the end of the second postnatal week
(dumesnil-bousez and sotelo, 1992) and to ﬁnally form a
terminal plexus at the border of the molecular and the
internal granular layers in the adult (caddy and biscoe,
1979; heckroth and eisenman, 1988; heckroth et al.,
1990; rossi et al., 1995). this has been proposed to be
caused by early defects in the purkinje cell dendrite-
climbing ﬁber relationships preceding purkinje cell death
and to be determined by the onset time and progression
rate of purkinje cell degeneration. grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ pur-
fig. 7. ultrastructure and immunogold detection of gaba in the
cerebellar cortex of the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ mouse. a,b: axo-somatic
and axo-dendritic synapses (arrows) made by climbing ﬁber-like ter-
minals (cf), respectively, on gaba-immunogold-labeled basket cell-
like somata (bc) and on unidentiﬁed dendrites (d) at the interface
between the molecular and the internal granular layers. g, glia. a:
31,000⫻. b: 25,000⫻. c–e: molecular layer. c: axon terminals (ax)
labeled with gaba-immunogold establish symmetric synapses (ar-
rowheads) on the soma of a basket cell-like interneuron (bc) labeled
with gaba-immunogold. see the unlabeled parallel ﬁber-like bouton
(pf) innervating the basket cell soma. 20,000⫻. d: axo-dendritic syn-
apses (arrowheads) made by gaba-immunopositive axon terminals
(ax) on a gaba-immunopositive stellate-like dendrite (d) in the upper
part of the molecular layer. see the asymmetric synapse (arrow) made
by an unlabeled parallel ﬁber bouton (pf) on a similar stellate-like
dendrite (d), which displays a few gaba-immunogold particles.
26,000⫻. e: a basket cell-like axon terminal (ax) containing mito-
chondria and neuroﬁlaments in electron-lucent neuroplasm displays
gaba-immunogold particles and makes symmetric synapses (arrow-
heads) on gaba-immunolabeled interneuron-like dendrites (d).
34,000⫻. asterisks, parallel ﬁbers in c–e. f–h: internal granular
layer. f,g: in these cerebellar glomeruli, unlabeled mossy ﬁber-like
varicosities (mf) establish asymmetric synapses (arrows) on unlabeled
granule cell dendrites (gc), which also make symmetric synapses
(arrowheads) with golgi neuron-like axon terminals (go) labeled by
gaba-immunogold particles. f: 14,000⫻, g: 20,000⫻. h: tight junc-
tions (white arrowheads) and symmetric synapse (arrow) between a
golgi axon terminal (go) displaying gaba-immunogold and unla-
beled granule cell dendrites (gc). 20,000⫻. g, glia. scale bars ⫽ 500
nm.
the journal of comparative neurology. doi 10.1002/cne
interneurons and parallel fiber synapses
633
fig. 8. a: asymmetric synapses (arrows) en marron made by a
climbing ﬁber-like varicosity (cf) on somato-dendritic proﬁles of a
golgi neuron (god) in the internal granular layer of the grid2lc/⫹;
bax⫺/⫺ mouse. 26,000⫻. b: a mossy ﬁber varicosity (mf) makes
asymmetric synapses (arrows) on granule cell dendrites (gc). com-
pare the low packing density of the synaptic vesicles in the mf rosette
with the high packing density of the climbing ﬁber vesicles in a.
arrowheads point to puncta adhaerentia between granules cell den-
drites. 34,000⫻. go, golgi axon terminal. scale bars ⫽ 500 nm.
kinje cells seem to suffer similar dendritic defects
(doughty et al., 2000), suggesting that climbing of olivo-
cerebellar ﬁbers may have been arrested at the same
development stage in both mutants. however, in the
grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ mouse a delay in purkinje cell degen-
eration (doughty et al., 2000) could have allowed climbing
ﬁbers to achieve somato-dendritic translocation more com-
pletely than in the grid2lc/⫹ cerebellar cortex. although
rare, we indeed observed climbing ﬁber terminals estab-
lishing asymmetric synapses on basket interneurons in
the bottom of the molecular layer.
many more parallel ﬁber bundles and varicosities per-
sisted in the molecular layer of the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺
mouse than in the grid2lc/⫹ mouse. this occurred in spite
of the degeneration of all the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ purkinje
cells and is primarily due to the rescue of their parent
neurons, the granule cells, by the deletion of bax expres-
sion. the increase in interneuron density may promote the
survival of parallel ﬁbers by providing more postsynaptic
domains for parallel ﬁber input. indeed, the surviving
parallel ﬁbers have established numerous asymmetric
synapses on the dendrites and the soma of the stellate, the
basket, and the golgi interneurons in the molecular layer
of the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ mice. although to a much lesser
extent, this also occurs in the grid2lc/⫹ molecular layer.
thus, the lack of purkinje cells in the grid2lc/⫹ and the
grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ cerebella did not impair the preserva-
tion of a normal connectivity (lemkey-johnston and lar-
ramendi, 1968) between granule cells and interneurons.
in other cases when purkinje cell degeneration occurs
after parallel ﬁbers have established functional synapses,
such as the nervous mutant mouse (sotelo and triller,
1979) and the gunn rat (takagishi and yamamura, 1989),
granule cell axons survive for a longer period than in cases
when they could not achieve synaptogenesis (e.g., the stag-
gerer mutant mouse [sotelo and changeux, 1974; sotelo,
1991]). this suggests that once presynaptic ﬁbers in the
cerebellum have been stabilized by establishing functional
synapses, they will have acquired increased survival ca-
pacity even if they lose their postsynaptic partners there-
after. by contrast, those that have not made synaptic
contacts may be unable to survive independently and de-
generate rapidly. in the absence of their major homolo-
gous postsynaptic targets, the purkinje cell tertiary
branchlet spines, the majority of surviving parallel ﬁbers
differentiate typical varicosities containing synaptic vesi-
cles, but they never establish their synaptic contacts. this
is shown in the staggerer mutant and in the nervous mu-
tant, where purkinje cell targets are lost (sotelo, 1991).
however, some of these varicosities form pseudo-synaptic
contacts facing astrocytic membranes, thus indicating
that in the absence of postsynaptic targets the parallel
ﬁbers have the capability to differentiate autonomously
transient “boutons en passant” with normal presynaptic
organelles. in the molecular layer of the grid2lc/⫹ mouse,
the loss of purkinje cells after the parallel ﬁbers have
634
established functional synapses appears to induce a sim-
ilar phenomenon, as suggested by the pseudo-presynaptic
parallel ﬁber boutons facing glia that we observed in this
study. a striking feature of the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ mouse
is that many more parallel ﬁbers have survived in the
molecular layer and they often make similar neuroglial
pseudo-synapses. it does not seem likely that these are
vacated presynaptic varicosities resulting from degenera-
tion or retraction of molecular layer interneuron processes
since most interneurons survived and displayed a normal
morphological aspect at both the histologic and ultrastruc-
tural levels. nevertheless, this possibility could not be
ruled out in the cerebellar cortex of the grid2lc/⫹ mouse,
which has lost many molecular layer interneurons, as
disclosed by our study.
keeping a balance between synaptic input
and output
the presence of supernumerary purkinje cells in the
cerebellar cortex of the bax⫺/⫺ knockout mice is the only
known difference between the wildtype and the bax⫺/⫺
mice (fan et al., 2001). this has been shown to result in
increased purkinje cell density as well as in a tendency of
the mean dendritic area and branch length to be reduced
in the homozygous mutants, suggesting that in spite of an
increased number of purkinje cells the global extent of the
postsynaptic domain available for afferent innervations
remains stable in the bax⫺/⫺ mutants. indeed, we could
not ﬁnd postsynaptic densities free of afferent presynaptic
nerve terminals at the purkinje cell dendritic spines and
shafts, as has been shown to occur in other abnormal cases
of increased purkinje cell / granule cell ratios, such as for
the purkinje cells of the reeler mouse located ectopically in
the core of the cerebellum (mariani et al., 1977; sotelo,
1991; bailly et al., 1998). thus, despite the presence of
supernumerary purkinje cell targets in the bax⫺/⫺ cere-
bellum, the stability of the global postsynaptic domain
may help explain why additional granule cells are not
rescued in the bax⫺/⫺ mutant (fan et al., 2001).
in the cerebellar cortex of the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ mouse,
the increased number of interneurons appeared to be in-
sufﬁcient in replacing branchlet spines of lost purkinje
cells due to the large amount of surviving granule cells
that maintained a high granule cell / postsynaptic target
ratio. this could explain why, in spite of increased avail-
ability of postsynaptic domain, parallel ﬁber boutons de-
void of postsynaptic target and differentiating close to
other parallel ﬁbers and/or making pseudosynaptic con-
tacts with facing astrocytes were frequent in the molecu-
lar layer of the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ mouse.
an important disequilibrium between parallel ﬁber in-
put and available postsynaptic domain could induce visi-
ble remodeling signs in the parallel ﬁber boutons such as
the membranous autophagic-like proﬁles that we ob-
served frequently in the parallel ﬁber varicosities of the
grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ mouse. such abnormal ultrastructural
aspects were displayed neither by the remaining parallel
ﬁber varicosities in the molecular layer of the grid2lc/⫹
mouse nor by the stellate and the basket axon terminals
that established symmetric synapses on their homologous
targets (i.e., the somato-dendritic proﬁles of these inter-
neurons and the dendrites of the golgi interneurons) in
the molecular layer of both grid2lc/⫹ (caddy and biscoe,
1979) and grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ mice. this suggests that
these unusual aspects are speciﬁc to the parallel ﬁber
the journal of comparative neurology. doi 10.1002/cne
s.h. zanjani et al.
varicosities in the double mutant and perhaps to the reg-
ulation of the synaptic input/output ratio stabilization at
parallel ﬁber synapses. the receptor grid2 regulates the
postsynaptic stabilization of the pf/pc synapse (kashi-
wabushi et al., 1995) and is tethered to a signaling path-
way regulating autophagy (yue et al., 2002). this suggests
that autophagy may be involved in synapse remodeling
and the present data may represent the ﬁrst morphologi-
cal evidence of the activation of autophagy during synapse
remodeling in presynaptic terminals.
our results show that the proapoptotic factor bax
seems to mediate a target-related loss of interneurons
disclosed by our study of the molecular layer of the
grid2lc/⫹ mouse. in addition, the granule cells that have
been saved from bax-mediated purkinje cell-related
death in the grid2lc/⫹;bax⫺/⫺ double mutant develop
parallel ﬁbers maintaining an important synaptic input
on the interneurons. this suggests that the survival of the
parallel ﬁbers and their synapses could depend on trophic
effects exerted by the interneurons. however, these tar-
gets are not enough, since those parallel ﬁbers also seem
to form “pseudo-synapses” with glia and display autoph-
agic proﬁles at their presynaptic varicosities, indicating
instability and remodeling of their contacts.
acknowledgments
the authors thank g. bombarde for excellent technical
assistance with histology and electron microscopy and the
plateforme technologique d’imagerie in vitro de l’ifr 37
de neurosciences de strasbourg. we also thank dr. a.
triller for helpful discussion.
literature cited
baader sl, schilling ml, rosengarten b, pretsch w, teutsch hf, ober-
dick j, schilling k. 1996. purkinje cell lineage and the topographic
organization of the cerebellar cortex: a view from x inactivation mosa-
ics. dev biol 174:393–406.
bailly yj, schoen sw, mariani j, kreutzberg gw, delhaye-bouchaud n.
1998. immature chemodifferentiation of purkinje cell synapses re-
vealed by 5⬘-nucleotidase ecto-enzyme activity in the cerebellum of the
reeler mouse. synapse 29:279–292.
caddy kwt, biscoe tj. 1979. structural and quantitative studies on the
normal ch3 and lurcher mutant mouse. philos trans r soc lond b
287:167–201.
dahmane n, ruiz-i-altaba a. 1999 sonic hedgehog regulates the growth
and patterning of the cerebellum. development 126:3089–3100.
de biasi s, vitellaro-zuccarello l, bernardi p, valtschanoff jg, weinberg
rj. 1994. ultrastructural and immunocytochemical characterization of
primary afferent terminals in the rat cuneate nucleus. j comp neurol
347:275–287.
deckwerth tl, elliott jl, knudson cm, johnson emj, snider wd, kors-
meyer sj. 1996. bax is required forneuronal death after trophic factor
deprivation and during development. neuron 17:401–411.
doughty ml, de jager pl, korsmeyer sj, heintz n. 2000. neurodegen-
eration in lurcher mice occurs via multiple cell death pathways. j neu-
rosci 20:3687–3694.
dumesnil-bousez n, sotelo c. 1992. early development of the lurcher
cerebellum: purkinje cell alterations and impairment of synaptogen-
esis. j neurocytol 21:506–529.
fan h, favero m, vogel mw. 2001. elimination of bax expression in mice
increases cerebellar purkinje cell numbers but not the number of
granule cells. j comp neurol 436:82–91.
hawkes r, faulkner-jones b, tam p, tan s-s. 1998. pattern formation in
the cerebellum of murine embryonic stem cell chimeras. eur j neurosci
10:790–793.
heckroth ja, eisenman lm. 1988. the olivocerebellar projection in lurcher
mutant mice. neurosci lett 85:199–204.
the journal of comparative neurology. doi 10.1002/cne
interneurons and parallel fiber synapses
heckroth ja, goldowitz d, eisenman lm. 1990. olivocerebellar ﬁber mat-
uration in normal and lurcher mutant mice: defective development in
lurcher. j comp neurol 291:415–430.
herrup k, sunter k. 1987. numerical matching during cerebellar devel-
opment : quantitative analysis of granule cell death in staggerer mouse
chimeras. j neurosci 7:829–836.
kashiwabushi n, ikeda k, araki k, hirano t, shibuki k, takayama c,
inoue y, kutsuwada t, yagi t, kang y, aizawa s, mishina m. 1995.
impairment of motor coordination, purkinje cell synapse formation,
and cerebellar long-term depression in glurd2 mutant mice. cell 81:
245–252.
knudson cm, tung ksk, tourtelotte wg, brown aj, korsmeyer sj. 1995.
bax-deﬁcient mice with lymphoid hyperplasia and male germ cell
death. science 270:96–99.
larramendi lm, victor t. 1967. synapses on the purkinje cell spines in the
mouse. an electron microscopic study. brain res 5:15–30.
lemkey-johnston n, larramendi l. 1968. types and distribution of syn-
apses upon basket and stellate cells of the mouse cerebellum: an
electron microscopic study. j comp neurol 134:73–112.
mariani j, crepel f, mikoshiba k, changeux jp, sotelo c. 1977. anatom-
ical, physiological and biochemical studies of the cerebellum from reeler
mutant mouse. philos trans r soc lond 281:1–28.
mathis l, bonnerot c, puelles l, nicolas j-f. 1997. retrospective clonal
analysis of the cerebellum using genetics lacz/lacz mouse mosaics.
development 124:4089–4104.
messner a, eisenberg b, martin dl. 1988. the role of timing and cell
interactions in cerebellar development. in: swann jw, messer a, edi-
tors. disorders of the developing nervous system: changing views on
their origins, diagnoses, and treatments. new york: alan r. liss. p
111–123.
norman d, feng l, gubbay j, chan e, heintz n. 1995. the lurcher gene
induces apoptotic death in cerebellar purkinje cells. development 121:
1183–1193.
phillips rjs. 1960. lurcher a new gene linkage group xi of the house
mouse. j genet 57:35–42.
rossi f, jankovski a, sotelo c. 1995. target neuron controls the integrity
of afferent axon phenotype: a study on the purkinje cell-climbing ﬁber
system in cerebellar mutant mice. j neurosci 15:2040–2056.
selimi f, vogel mw, mariani j. 2000. bax inactivation in lurcher mutants
rescues cerebellar granule cells but not purkinje cells or inferior olivary
neurons. j neurosci 20:5339–5345.
selimi f, lohof am, heitz s, lalouette a, jarvis ci, bailly y, mariani j.
2003. lurcher grid2-induced death and depolarization can be disso-
ciated in cerebellar purkinje cells. neuron 37:813–819.
smeyne rj, chu t, lewin a, bian f, crisman ss, kunsch c, lira sa,
oberdick j. 1995. local control of granule cell generation by cerebellar
purkinje cells. mech cell neurosci 6:230–251.
sonmez e, herrup k. 1984. role of staggerer gene in determining cell
number in cerebellar cortex. ii. granule cell death and persistence of
the external granule cell layer in young mouse chimeras. dev brain
res 12:271–283.
sotelo c. 1991. cerebellar synaptogenesis: mutant mice-neuronal grafting.
j physiol paris 85:134–144.
635
sotelo c, changeux j-p. 1974. transsynaptic degeneration en cascade in
the cerebellar cortex of staggerer mutant mice. brain res 67:519–526.
sotelo c, triller a. 1979. fate of presynaptic afferents to purkinje cells in
the adult nervous mutant mouse: a model to study presynaptic stabi-
lization. brain res 175:11–36.
takagishi y, yamamura h. 1989. purkinje cell abnormalities and synap-
togenesis in genetically jaundiced rats (gunn rats). brain res 492:116–
128.
vogel mw, herrup k. 1993. a theoretical and experimental examination of
cell lineage relationships among cerebellar purkinje cells in the mouse.
dev biol 156:49–68.
vogel mw, sunter k, herrup k. 1989. numerical matching between gran-
ule and purkinje cells in lurcher chimeric mice: a hypothesis for the
trophic rescue of granule cells from target related cell death. j neurosci
9:3454–3462.
wallace wa. 1999. purkinje-cell-derived sonic hedgehog granule neuron
precursor cell proliferation in the developing mouse cerebellum. curr
biol 9:445–448.
wechsler-reya rj, scott mp. 1999. control of neural precursor prolifera-
tion in the cerebellum by sonic hedgehog. 22:103–114.
wetts r, herrup k. 1982a. interaction of granule, purkinje, and inferior
olivary neurons in lurcher chimeric mice. i. qualitative studies. j
embryol exp morphol 68:87–98.
wetts r, herrup k. 1982b. interaction of granule, purkinje, and inferior
olivary neurons in lurcher chimeric mice. ii. granule cell death. brain
res 250:358–362.
wetts r, herrup k. 1982c. cerebellar purkinje cells are descended from a
small number of progenitors committed during early development.
qualitative analysis of lurcher chimeric mice. j neurosci 2:1494–1498.
wetts r, herrup k. 1983. direct correlation between purkinje and granule
cell number in the cerebella of lurcher chimeras and wild-type mice.
dev brain res 10:41–47.
white fa, keller-peck cr, knudson m, korsmeyer sj, snider wd. 1998.
widespread elimination of naturally occurring neuronal death in bax-
deﬁcient mice. j neurosci 18:1428–1439.
wu¨ llner u, weller m, schulz j, krajewski s, reed j, klockgether s. 1998.
bcl-2, bax and bcl-x expression in neuronal apoptosis: a study of
mutant weaver and lurcher mice. acta neuropathol 96:233–238.
yue z, horton a, bravin m, dejager pl, selimi f, heintz n. 2002. a novel
protein complex linking the delta 2 glutamate receptor and autophagy:
implication for neurodegeneration in lurcher mice. neuron 35:921–933.
zanjani hs, vogel mw, delhaye-bouchaud n, martinou jc, mariani j.
1996. increased cerebellar purkinje cell numbers in mice overexpress-
ing a human bcl-2 transgene. j comp neurol 374:332–341.
zanjani hs, vogel mw, delhaye-bouchaud n, martinou jc, mariani j.
1997. increased olivary neuron and cerebellar granule cell numbers in
transgenic mice overexpressing a human bcl-2 transgene. j neurobiol
32:502–516.
zanjani hs, lemaigre-dubreuil y, tillakaratne nj, blokhin a, mcmahon
rp, tobin aj, vogel mw, mariani j. 2004. cerebellar purkinje cell loss
in aging hu-bcl-2 transgenic mice. j comp neurol 475:481–492.
zuo j, de jager pl, takahashi ka, jiang w, linden dj, heintz n. 1997.
neurodegeneration in lurcher mice caused by mutation in delta2 glu-
tamate receptor gene. nature 388:769–773.