immunity
previews
autophagy in mhc class ii
presentation: sampling from within
victoria mene´ ndez-benito1 and jacques neefjes1,*
1 division of tumor biology, the netherlands cancer institute, plesmanlaan 121, 1066 cx amsterdam, the netherlands
*correspondence: j.neefjes@nki.nl
doi 10.1016/j.immuni.2007.01.005
mhc class ii molecules usually present exogenous antigens, but peptidome analyses have also iden-
tiﬁed many antigens from cytosolic or nuclear sources. in this issue of immunity, schmid et al. (2007)
show that mhc class ii molecules can present these through autophagosomes.
mhc class i molecules are specialized
in presenting peptides derived from
proteins degraded by the proteasome.
these are mainly cytosolic and nuclear
proteins, as well as proteins from the
endoplasmic reticulum (er) and mito-
chondria, degraded by the protea-
some after translocation into the cyto-
sol. the protein-degradation products
are then translocated from the cytosol
into the er lumen, where they are
loaded into awaiting mhc class i
molecules for further transport to the
plasma membrane.
mhc class ii molecules are differ-
ent. they avoid peptide loading in the
er by binding the invariant chain that
then acts as a pseudopeptide. more-
over, the invariant chain supports er
exit and correct
travelling of mhc
class ii molecules to late endo-
somal compartments (generally called
miics). the invariant chain is subse-
quently degraded and exchanged for
fragments of proteins degraded in the
endosome-lysosomal
track. conse-
quently, mhc class ii molecules are
specialized in the presentation of
‘‘exogenous antigens’’
(li et al.,
2005). still, analysis of the mhc class
ii peptidome revealed many peptides
of cytosolic or even nuclear origin (li
et al., 2005), and this could not be ex-
plained through the ‘‘classical route’’
of mhc class ii antigen presentation.
nuclear and cytosolic antigens can,
in principle, enter the miic in various
ways. they may be released from ne-
crotic cells and followed by uptake by
other cells (for antigen presentation),
they may be imported by selective
tap-like endosomal transporters, and
they may enter
the multivesicular
miic via the interior of internal vesicles
and be concluded by liquefaction.
however, no evidence exists for any
of
these routes. nevertheless, one
relatively well-established pathway
exists to deliver cytosolic material
into endosomes and lysosomes: auto-
phagy (yorimitsu and klionsky, 2005).
conserved from yeast to mammals,
autophagy is a process that literally
means ‘‘self-eating.’’ various types of
‘‘self-eating’’ exist: chaperone-medi-
ated autophagy, microautophagy, and
macroautophagy.
chaperone-mediated autophagy is
activated during metabolic stress
conditions. protein substrates asso-
ciate with molecular chaperones after
recognition of a weakly deﬁned pen-
tameric sequence. subsequently, the
protein substrates are transferred into
the lysosomal lumen in an undeﬁned
mechanism that
involves lysosomal
receptors, such as lamp-2 (zhou
et al., 2005), and lysosomal chaper-
ones. microautophagy is a constitutive
process where lysosomal membranes
engulf small segments of cytosol, and
this is analogous to the entry of cyto-
solic material
in the internal vesicles
of multivesicular bodies. this results
in nonselective uptake of small cyto-
solic volumes for digestion in lyso-
finally, macroautophagy
somes.
(yorimitsu and klionsky, 2005)
(fig-
ure 1) occurs under stress conditions
(usually amino acid or glucose starva-
tion) where autophagosome vesicles
are formed. these vesicles are dou-
ble-membrane 300- to 900-nm-sized
structures that encapsulate a fraction
the cytoplasm in a nonspeciﬁc
of
manner. subsequently,
the outer
the autophagosome
membrane of
fuses to the late endosomal-lysosomal
membranes. the resulting single-
membrane structure, called the auto-
is released into the
phagic body,
lysosomal
lumen. the membrane of
the autophagic body is then dissolved
by lysosomal esterases, and the
cytoplasmic content is released and
degraded by lysosomal proteases.
obviously, mhc class ii molecules
could sample cytosolic antigenic
peptides that are the result of this
process for presentation.
indeed,
paludan et al. have previously shown
efﬁcient mhc class ii presentation of
an endogenously synthesized viral
protein (ebna-1) after
induction of
macroautophagy, suggesting that this
pathway
cytosol-into-miic
lumen transfer (paludan et al., 2005).
allows
mhc class ii molecules can pres-
ent cytosolic antigens under normal
conditions,
and the question is
whether such antigens are delivered
by autophagy. in this issue of immu-
nity, schmid et al. suggest that this
can be the case (schmid et al., 2007).
they use the well-deﬁned macroauto-
phagosomal protein atg8 (also known
as lc3) to target a model antigen for
presentation by mhc class ii and
observed strongly enhanced presen-
tation under basal conditions. these
data suggest that the macroautopha-
gic process occurs under basal condi-
tions rather
than exclusively under
starvation. nevertheless, the possibil-
ity that overexpression of lc3 itself in-
duces autophagy cannot be excluded.
the molecular process of macroau-
tophagy is evolutionary conserved
and has been best studied in yeast.
macroautophagy has an induction
phase and is followed by a vesicle bio-
genesis and a fusion phase. starvation
immunity 26, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc. 1
immunity
previews
also
to some extent, the ubiquitin activation
system, but now various proteins are
covalently linked through a thioester
bond to the c-terminal gly residue of
atg12 and lc3. first, the c-terminal
arg residue of lc3 is removed so that
the penultimate gly residue can be
exposed. atg7 also forms a thioester
bond with the lc3 group before ex-
change by the e2-mimicking enzyme
atg3, which is released for pe binding
to the c-terminal gly residue of lc3. it
is this modiﬁcation of lc3 that is used
by schmid et al. to reveal autophagy
formation. this is obviously an indirect
argument, but macroautophagy is
further illustrated by electron micro-
graphs that reveal the location of lc3
in typical
lysosomal-autophagosomal
structures (schmid et al., 2007). auto-
phagosomal vesicles are formed in
a complex manner (figure 1) where
a multispanning membrane protein
is recruited to the expanding
(atg9)
the ‘‘young’’
double membrane of
autophagosome, which
in-
cludes pe-lc3 and a coat formed by
the heterotrimeric atg12-atg5-atg16
complex. during
autophagosome
formation, a segment of cytoplasm is
captured after closure of the double
membrane by unknown components.
the coat is then released and leaves
the encapsulated pe-lc3 in the inter-
nal membrane as an ‘‘autophagoso-
mal marker.’’ the outer membrane of
the autophagosomes can then fuse
with late endosome-lysosomes by
using the late endosomal homotypic
fusion machinery. the autophagic
body enters the late endosomal-
lysosomal lumen where it is destroyed
along with its cytosolic content. this
also includes the destruction of pe-
lc3, and schmid et al. had to inhibit
proteolysis by long-term neutralization
of autophagosomes-lysosomes with
chloroquine to efﬁciently detect pe-
lc3 (although it also occurred under
control conditions)
(schmid et al.,
2007). chloroquine also neutralizes
the mitochondrial
inner-membrane
space and thus causes atp depletion.
because this mimics the starvation
conditions required for autophagy
induction, such results should be inter-
preted carefully.
in relation to mhc class ii an-
tigen presentation, autophagosomes
figure 1. presentation of cytosolic content by mhc class ii molecules via
autophagosomes
during starvation conditions, tor kinase is inactivated and thus results in hypophosphorylation of
the autophagosomal activation complex and induction of autophagy. the autophagosome is
formed with membrane from an unknown source supported by several atg proteins, including
the atg12-atg5-atg16 complex and atg9. lc3 (atg8) is conjugated to phosphoetanolamine (pe)
in a three-step reaction catalyzed by atg4, atg7, and atg3 and subsequently incorporated into
the autophagosomal membrane. the autophagosome expands and encapsulates cytosol
in
a nonspeciﬁc manner. after completion of autophagosome formation, atg12-atg5-atg16 com-
plexes dissociate from the membrane. pe-lc3 separates from the cytosolic site of autophago-
somes, whereas pe-lc3 in the autophagic lumen remains captured. the outer membrane of
the completed autophagosome fuses with (mhc-class-ii-containing) late endosomes, with assis-
tance by proteins such as rab7. the single-membrane autophagic body is dissolved by esterases,
and the cytosolic content is released (including lc3) into the late endosomal lumen and degraded
by endosomal proteases. the proteolytic products can be loaded onto mhc class ii molecules.
stress is sensed by the tor kinase
(mtor), resulting in its inactivation.
mtor is the ‘‘master regulator’’ of
autophagy and can be inhibited by
compounds like rapamycin, resulting
in autophagy. the failure to phosphor-
ylate downstream tor targets then
results in the formation of a large cyto-
solic multi-enzyme complex of atg
(autophagy-related genes) products
including a kinase (atg1) and a vacu-
ole-forming protein vac8 (yorimitsu
and klionsky, 2005). however, this is
for autophagosome
not sufﬁcient
formation.
in a complicated and
unique cytosolic enzymatic cascade,
phosphoethanolamine (pe)-linked lc3
is produced. this cascade resembles,
2 immunity 26, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc.
immunity
previews
appear to be a reasonable explanation
for cytosolic antigen delivery to the
miic for mhc class ii presentation
(schmid et al., 2007), especially under
conditions of nutrient starvation when
mtor activity is inhibited. schmid
et al. now show that autophagosomes
are continuously delivering cytosolic
material to mhc class ii molecules,
even under conditions of normal food
supply when the mtor should be
activated and autophagy should be
inhibited. an important piece of data
is the use of antigens targeted through
the autophagosomal protein lc3 in the
form of chimeric proteins to miic and
then efﬁcient presentation by mhc
class
ii molecules. nevertheless,
various questions remain. is ectopic
expression of lc3 inducing autopha-
gosomes? because lc3 requires
modiﬁcation by the ub-like cascade
to participating in autopha-
prior
gosome biogenesis,
this appears
unlikely. can autophagosomes be
generated under different conditions?
bacterial (and perhaps viral) infections
as well as exposure to ifn-g and
possibly other interleukins may induce
autophagic responses (gutierrez et al.,
2004), resulting in the presentation of
cytosolic antigens along with those
from pathogens. pathogens like myco-
bacterium tuberculosis may induce
this by affecting pathways upstream
of mtor, such as the pkb-akt kinase
pathway (deretic, 2006). how impor-
tant the autophagocytic pathway is
for mhc class ii responses to such
pathogens is unclear. moreover, as-
suming that autophagy participates in
antigen production, how efﬁcient will
this nonselective delivery pathway be
for cytosolic proteins? an autophago-
some has a diameter of approximately
0.4 mm, which is only slightly smaller
than an miic and can capture approx-
imately 0.01% of the cytosolic volume
(alberts et al., 2003). efﬁcient mhc
class ii presentation of cytosolic pro-
teins requires the formation of many
autophagosomes, and it
is unclear
how efﬁcient this process is under
healthy growth conditions. obviously,
proteins highly expressed in the
cytosol or selectively targeted to auto-
phagosomes (by lc3 or by chaper-
one-mediated autophagy) will be
successful in using the autophagoso-
mal-lysosomal pathway for mhc class
ii presentation, unlike freely diffusing
cytosolic and nuclear antigens present
in low copy numbers. is the constitu-
tive macroautophagosomal pathway
the sole mechanism for cytosolic and
nuclear delivery to mhc class ii mole-
cules? quantitative analysis of mhc-
class-ii-associated peptides of cyto-
solic and nuclear origin showed that
24 hr after autophagy induction by
methyladenine, only 2 out of 12 anti-
gens were better presented (dengjel
et al., 2005). this suggests that other
pathways are operational for the other
ten cytosolic peptides detected in
mhc class ii molecules. such path-
ways may include other
forms of
phagocytosis, entry in miic during
the normal formation of multivesicular
bodies, and uptake and handling of
apoptotic and necrotic debris.
mhc class
ii presentation of
cytosolic antigens have been shown
to be required for inducing a robust
mhc-class-i-restricted ctl response
(ossendorp et al., 1998). this is only
understandable when the same anti-
gen is presented by mhc class i and
mhc class
ii molecules. direct
presentation of cytosolic antigens by
mhc class i is understood in detail.
here, macroautophagy explains how
cytosolic antigens enter
the mhc
class ii route for presentation.
references
alberts, b., bray, d., hopkin, k., johnson, a.,
lewis, j., raff, m., roberts, k., and walter, p.
(2003). essential cell biology (oxford: garland
science), p. 50.
dengjel, j., schoor, o., fischer, r., reich, m.,
kraus, m., muller, m., kreymborg, k., altenber-
end, f., brandenburg, j., kalbacher, h., et al.
(2005). proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 102,
7922–7927.
deretic, v. (2006). curr. opin. immunol. 18,
375–382.
gutierrez, m.g., master, s.s., singh, s.b., tay-
lor, g.a., colombo, m.i., and deretic, v. (2004).
cell 119, 753–766.
li, p., gregg, j.l., wang, n., zhou, d., o’don-
nell, p., blum, j.s., and crotzer, v.l. (2005).
immunol. rev. 207, 206–217.
ossendorp, f., mengede, e., camps, m., fil-
ius, r., and melief, c.j. (1998). j. exp. med.
187, 693–702.
paludan, c., schmid, d., landthaler, m., vock-
erodt, m., kube, d., tuschl, t., and munz, c.
(2005). science 307, 593–596.
schmid, d., pypaert, m., and munz, c. (2007).
immunity 26, this issue, 79–92.
yorimitsu, t., and klionsky, d.j. (2005). cell
death differ. 12, 1542–1552.
zhou, d., li, p., lin, y., lott, j.m., hislop, a.d.,
canaday, d.h., brutkiewicz, r.r., and blum,
j.s. (2005). immunity 22, 571–581.
immunity 26, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc. 3