insight  review
nature|vol 443|19 october 2006|doi:10.1038/nature05291
the roles of intracellular protein-degradation 
pathways in neurodegeneration
david c. rubinsztein1
many late-onset neurodegenerative diseases, including parkinson’s disease and huntington’s disease, 
are associated with the formation of intracellular aggregates by toxic proteins. it is therefore crucial to 
understand the factors that regulate the steady-state levels of these ‘toxins’, at both the synthetic and 
degradation stages. the degradation pathways acting on such aggregate-prone cytosolic proteins include 
the ubiquitin–proteasome system and macroautophagy. dysfunction of the ubiquitin–proteasome or 
macroautophagy pathways might contribute to the pathology of various neurodegenerative conditions. 
however, enhancing macroautophagy with drugs such as rapamycin could offer a tractable therapeutic 
strategy for a number of these diseases. 
many late-onset neurodegenerative diseases are caused by aggregate-
prone proteins1. these diseases, known as proteinopathies, include 
conditions in which the proteins are predominantly cytosolic (such as 
parkinson’s disease, pd, and adult-onset huntington’s disease, hd), 
predominantly intranuclear (for example, spinocerebellar ataxia type 
1), aggregated in the endoplasmic reticulum (as seen with neuroserpin 
mutations that cause familial encephalopathy with neuroserpin inclu-
sion bodies) and secreted extracellularly (for example, amyloid-β in 
alzheimer’s disease). whether soluble monomers, oligomers or larger 
aggregates are the most toxic species causing many of these condi-
tions has been the subject of considerable debate and uncertainty (for 
a discussion, see ref. 2 and page 774). nevertheless, in general, it seems 
that the capacity to aggregate (although not necessarily the aggregates 
themselves) is correlated with toxicity. for instance, the point mutations 
in α-synuclein and tau that cause dominant forms of pd and fronto-
temporal dementia, respectively, aggregate more rapidly than the wild-
type proteins. the same phenomenon is seen with the polyglutamine 
expansion mutations that cause diseases such as hd — in these diseases 
earlier onset correlates with longer polyglutamine tracts, and aggrega-
tion propensity increases with polyglutamine tract length3.
extensive genetic and transgenic data suggest that many of the muta-
tions responsible for proteinopathies cause disease by conferring a toxic 
gain of function on the relevant proteins (for example, hd; see box 1). 
thus, it is important to understand the cellular processes regulating 
their levels. steady-state levels are determined by synthesis and degra-
dation rates. 
for some such proteins, it is likely that the holoprotein is relatively 
or entirely benign, and that the toxic species is generated by a series of 
cleavage events leading to the production of a toxic fragment. in such 
cases, the rate of synthesis of the full-length protein may not be a major 
determinant of the production rate of the toxic species — the main rate-
limiting step under conditions of synthesis varying between 50% and 
100% of physiological rates may be at the level of cleavage (if the cleavage 
step is saturated). the best-known example of cleavage generating a toxic 
product occurs during the production of amyloid-β peptide from full-
length amyloid precursor protein (app)4. however, related toxic-frag-
ment models also  seem to be relevant to certain polyglutamine diseases, 
such as hd5,6 and spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (ref. 7). in principle, these 
processing steps may be therapeutically tractable. for instance, it may 
be possible to modulate amyloid-β levels by altering the activities of the 
different secretase enzymes that regulate its formation4. 
in this review, i focus on how cells regulate the levels of aggregate-
prone proteins, concentrating on degradation pathways. i consider the 
possibility that defective degradation causes certain forms of neuro-
degeneration, and discuss therapeutic strategies aimed at reducing the 
levels of toxic proteins by enhancing their degradation.
pathways that clear aggregate-prone proteins
the ubiquitin–proteasome and autophagy–lysosome pathways are the 
two main routes of protein and organelle clearance in eukaryotic cells. 
proteasomes are barrel-shaped multiprotein complexes that predomi-
nantly degrade short-lived nuclear and cytosolic proteins8 (fig. 1). the 
ubiquitin–proteasome system is also important for the degradation of 
misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. misfolded endoplas-
mic-reticulum proteins are retrotranslocated back into the cytosol, where 
they are degraded by proteasomes (a process known as endoplasmic-
reticulum-associated degradation, or erad). most proteins are tar-
geted for proteasomal degradation after being covalently modified with 
ubiquitin, which is conjugated through its carboxy terminus, usually to 
ε-amino groups of lysine residues. this conjugation typically involves 
three types of enzyme: e1 (ubiquitin-activating enzyme) hydrolyses 
atp and forms a thioester-linked conjugate between itself and ubiqui-
tin; e2 (ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme) receives ubiquitin from e1 and 
forms a similar thioester intermediate with ubiquitin; and e3 (ubiquitin 
ligase) binds both e2 and the substrate, and transfers the ubiquitin to the 
substrate. frequently, the ubiquitin itself forms a substrate for further 
rounds of ubiquitination, resulting in the formation of a polyubiquitin 
chain. chains of four or more ubiquitin molecules (linked by lysines at 
residue 48) appear to form a recognition signal that allows substrates to 
be shuttled to the proteasome by a set of proteins that, in at least some 
cases, include the chaperone cdc48/p97 (refs 9, 10).
many of the proteins that cause proteinopathies (including those 
with polyglutamine expansions and α-synucleins) are partly depend-
ent on the ubiquitin–proteasome pathway for their clearance11,12. 
1department of medical genetics, cambridge institute for medical research, addenbrooke’s hospital, hills road, cambridge cb2 2xy, uk.
780
 ©2006
nature  publishing group
nature|vol 443|19 october 2006
insight  review
box 1 | huntington’s disease results from a gain-of-function mutation
loss-of-function mutations cause disease by reducing the activity of 
the gene product. in an autosomal-dominant disease, the most severe 
mutations — null mutations — reduce protein activity to 50% of wild-
type levels. the results of genetic and transgenic experiments strongly 
indicate that hd and related polyglutamine diseases are not caused by 
a simple hemizygous loss of function70–72. 
mice lacking one hd-gene orthologue are essentially normal, 
although complete loss of huntingtin causes embryonic lethality. 
humans with wolf–hirschhorn syndrome have hemizygous loss of 
the tip of chromosome 4p, which includes the hd gene. these people 
do not show features of hd73. however, a number of transgenic 
mouse and drosophila models have been made in which a mutant-
huntingtin transgene, comprising either the whole coding region, an 
amino-terminal fragment or simply isolated expanded polyglutamine 
repeats, is expressed. these animals also have two normal huntingtin 
orthologues but recapitulate many of the features of the human 
disease (for a review, see ref. 74). 
furthermore, expression of hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl transferase 
with expanded polyglutamines caused the mice to develop a 
progressive neurological disorder with clinical and pathological 
features reminiscent of hd75. because complete loss of hypoxanthine 
phosphoribosyl transferase results in no overt phenotype in mice, this 
suggests that the predominant action of the hd mutation is a toxic 
gain of function. gain-of-function mutations can cause disease by 
conferring additional properties on the mutant gene product — these 
may include hyperactivity of normal function and/or new toxic 
properties unrelated to normal function. however, it is possible that 
the hd mutation may result in some loss of function that may make 
minor contributions to pathogenesis76.
in a dominant-negative mutation, the (autosomal dominant) 
mutation reduces the activity of the mutant allele’s gene product but 
also inhibits the function of the wild-type product. this can occur if the 
gene encodes components of oligomeric complexes, in which optimal 
activity requires all components to be functional. in dominant-negative 
mutations, the activity of the gene products encoded by the wild-type 
and mutant gene is generally <50% of wild type. we cannot exclude 
the possibility that there may be some dominant-negative effects that 
impact on hd, in addition to gain of function.
however, substrates need to be unfolded to pass through the narrow 
pore of the proteasome barrel, which precludes the clearance of oli-
gomeric and aggregated proteins13. recent data suggest that the pro-
teasome’s enzymatic machinery might not be able to cleave between 
successive glutamine residues14,15. this has important implications for 
polyglutamine-expansion mutations, as it suggests that the proteasome 
removes the flanking sequences around the expansions. on exiting from 
the proteasome, such isolated polyglutamine stretches may be more 
toxic than the pre-proteasomal species with the flanking sequences. 
however, it is likely that the isolated polyglutamine peptides exiting 
the proteasome are rapidly degraded by as yet unidentified cytosolic 
peptidases, because there are a number of normal proteins with wild-
type polyglutamine stretches of 20–35 repeats.
mammalian lysosomes can degrade substrates such as protein com-
plexes and organelles. the bulk degradation of cytoplasmic proteins 
or organelles is largely mediated by macroautophagy, a process gen-
erally referred to as autophagy16 (box 2). this involves the formation 
of double-membrane-bounded structures known as autophagosomes, 
or autophagic vacuoles (avs). these fuse with lysosomes to form  
autophagolysosomes, and their contents are then degraded by acidic 
lysosomal hydrolases. autophagosomes are generated by the elongation 
of small membranous structures known as autophagosome precursors. 
however, the precise origin or origins of these structures have yet to be 
elucidated in mammalian cells. macroautophagy can be induced under 
conditions of physiological stress such as starvation. several protein 
kinases regulate macroautophagy, the best characterized of which is 
mammalian target of rapamycin (mtor), which negatively regulates 
the pathway. many of the proteins with key roles in autophagy are 
designated atg (in yeast)/atg (in mammals), and a number of these 
are conserved from yeast to humans.
polyglutamine-expansion mutations, such as those seen in mutant 
huntingtin and ataxin 3 (causing spinocerebellar ataxia type 3, sca3), 
mutant forms of α-synuclein (which cause familial pd), and different 
forms of tau (including mutations causing frontotemporal dementia) 
are strongly dependent on the macroautophagy pathway for their clear-
ance12,17–21. pharmacological and genetic interference in this pathway 
slows the clearance of these substrates and increases levels of aggregates 
(where these are seen) and toxicity (in models showing toxicity). inhibi-
tion of macroautophagy by gene knockout in otherwise normal mice 
leads to the formation of ubiquitinated aggregates in various tissues22. 
our data suggest that the dependence of proteins on the macroau-
tophagy pathway for their clearance correlates with their propensity 
to aggregate11,12,17,20,23. for instance, inhibition of macroautophagy has 
much smaller effects (if any effect at all) on the clearance of wild-type 
huntingtin exon 1 fragments or wild-type α-synuclein than on the 
clearance of the mutant aggregate-prone species11,12,17,23. this might be 
because the wild-type proteins are efficiently cleared by proteasomes. 
the ubiquitin–proteasome system is more efficient than basal levels 
of macroautophagy, so for proteins that have access to both pathways, 
proteasomes are the favoured and dominating clearance route. this 
preference for ubiquitin–proteasomal degradation may also relate to 
tagging and targeting mechanisms that contribute to the selectivity of 
this pathway. when a cytosolic protein is aggregate-prone and a poor 
proteasome substrate, macroautophagy becomes a major clearance route 
by default — under these circumstances, the macroautophagy route 
becomes more effective than the proteasome (fig. 2). indeed, when 
normal cultured neurons are treated with proteasome inhibitors, the 
proteins that form aggregates seem to be degraded by macroautophagy24. 
although this model (fig. 2) suggests that macroautophagy is a default 
pathway that becomes increasingly important when an aggregate-prone 
substrate cannot be efficiently cleared by the proteasome, it is possible 
that there are also signals (as yet unknown) that preferentially target 
such proteins to autophagosomes. macroautophagy — in which bulk 
cytoplasm is engulfed by autophagosomes — is generally considered 
to be a non-specific process in organisms from yeast to humans, but a 
specific uptake process is conceivable, as there are precedents for cargo 
selection in the macroautophagy-related cytoplasm-to-vacuole traffick-
ing (cvt) pathway in yeast16.
another pathway for cytosolic protein clearance through lysosomes 
is chaperone-mediated autophagy (cma), a pathway distinct from 
macroautophagy. all the cma substrate  proteins described so far are 
soluble cytosolic proteins containing a targeting motif biochemically 
related to the pentapeptide lys-phe-glu-arg-gln (kferq)25. this 
motif, which is present in ~30% of cytosolic proteins, is recognized by 
a cytosolic chaperone, heat-shock cognate 70 (hsc70). this transfers 
protein substrates to the lysosomal membrane, where, through binding 
to the receptor lysosome-associated membrane protein 2a (lamp2a), 
they are translocated into the lysosomal lumen and degraded. lyso-
somes can also directly engulf cytoplasm by invagination, protrusion 
and/or septation of the lysosomal limiting membrane, a process known 
as microautophagy. however, this process is poorly understood in mam-
malian cells.
proteasome dysfunction leading to neurodegeneration
a number of proteinopathies have been associated with decreased pro-
teasome activity in humans or in cell models. these include sporadic 
pd, in which levels of 20/26s proteasomes and proteasome activity 
are reduced in vulnerable regions, and hd26,27. decreased proteasome-
pathway activity seems to be a feature of many cell models in which 
intracellular aggregates are formed28. however, it is not clear whether 
these phenomena are a cause or late effects of disease. in some poly-
glutamine-disease mouse models, proteasome impairment is not seen at 
(early) symptomatic stages29,30. furthermore, proteasome subunits can 
be cleaved by caspases in cells undergoing apoptosis31, and it is possible 
that this process may explain some of the cell-model data.
 ©2006
nature  publishing group
781
insight  review
nature|vol 443|19 october 2006
u b
ub
ub
u b
u b
ub
ub
ub
u b
u b
ub
ub
ub
u b
u b
ub
u b
u b
u b
ub
u b
u b
u b
u b
e1
e2, e3
deubiquitinating
enzymes
‘shuttling’ proteins
(including cdc48/p97
in some cases)
free ub
pool
substrate
amino
acids
cytosolic
peptidases
peptides
proteasome
figure 1 | schematic diagram of the ubiquitin–proteasome system.  before 
they are targeted for proteasomal degradation, most proteins are covalently 
modified with ubiquitin (ub). typically, three enzyme types are involved 
in this process — ubiquitin-activating (e1), ubiquitin-conjugating (e2) and 
ubiquitin ligase (e3) enzymes. proteins tagged with chains of four or more 
ubiquitins are shuttled to the the proteasome by various proteins such as 
cdc48/p97. in the proteasome, proteins are reduced to peptides, which are 
then released into the cytosol and further broken down by peptidases. see 
the text for more details. 
the strongest support for the possibility that the ubiquitin–protea-
some system has a primary role in the pathology of a wide range of pro-
teinopathies (or in sporadic forms of diseases such as pd) comes from 
human/mammalian mutations that involve components of this pathway 
and cause neurodegeneration. these include parkin, an e3 ligase in 
which autosomal recessive loss-of-function mutations cause pd32–34. a 
number of parkin substrates have been identified, but at present it is not 
clear which is the major contributor to pathology in parkin deficiency. 
heterozygous mutations in the gene encoding ubiquitin carboxy-ter-
minal hydrolase l1 (uchl1) have been causally implicated in families 
with pd35, although the data are contentious36. although the s18y vari-
ant has been associated with sporadic pd in genetic-association stud-
ies, this association has not withstood robust confirmatory analyses37. 
uchl1 might function not only as a ubiquitin hydrolase (hydrolysing 
ubiquitin chains to free ubiquitin monomers) but also as a ubiquitin 
ligase38. the role of uchl1 in human pd is still unclear, but loss of 
function is known to be deleterious, as recessive deletion of part of this 
gene causes gracile axonal dystrophy in mice39. although this phenotype 
is not obviously parkinsonian, it is associated with the formation of 
ubiquitinated intraneuronal aggregates39.
mutations in cdc48/p97 (also known as valosin-containing protein) 
cause a dominantly inherited disease known as inclusion-body myopa-
thy with paget’s disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia, which is 
also characterized by cytoplasmic and nuclear aggregates in muscle and 
brain tissues40. this pathology is consistent with the role of cdc48/p97 
as a component of the machinery shuttling ubiquitinated erad sub-
strates to the proteasome9,10 (although cdc48/p97 has a number of 
other roles that may also affect pathology).
the above genetic data, which suggest that primary genetic deficien-
cies of components of the ubiquitin–proteasome system are sufficient to 
cause neurodegeneration, are complemented by pharmacological data 
showing that the injection of proteasome inhibitors into adult rats causes 
parkinsonian features, including lewy-body-like aggregates41. however, 
it is still not clear whether proteasomal dysfunction is an important early 
causal factor in vivo in proteinopathies in which there are no primary 
defects in the ubiquitin–proteasome pathway.
autophagy dysfunction and neurodegeneration
macroautophagy (referred to below simply as autophagy) blockade 
— for example, through gene knockout — has deleterious effects on a 
number of systems. it prevents efficient nutrient recycling from mac-
romolecules under conditions of starvation42, enhances susceptibility 
to certain types of apoptosis43,44 and, as mentioned previously, leads 
to the formation of ubiquitinated inclusions24. knockouts of specific 
autophagy genes (atg5 and atg7) lead to early neonatal lethality22,42. 
interestingly, mice with neuronally confined autophagy-gene knockouts 
develop intraneuronal aggregates and neurodegeneration45,46. 
although defects in autophagy-restricted genes have not been 
described in humans, autophagy may be compromised by other means. 
for example, dynein function is important for autophagosome–lyso-
some fusion, and autophagic clearance is impaired even by hemizygous 
loss of dynein activity47. dyneins are motor proteins that typically move 
cargoes towards the cell centre along microtubules, and components of 
this machinery are genetically compromised in some forms of motor 
neuron disease, either directly (for example, by a dynactin mutation in 
one form of human motor neuron disease48,49, and dynein heavy-chain 
mutations in the legs at odd angles (loa) and cramping (cra1) mice)50, or 
indirectly, if dynein functions are compromised by other mutations (for 
instance, sod1 mutations causing familial amyotrophic lateral sclero-
sis51,52). in some of these conditions (for example, sod1 mutations, loa 
mice and human dynactin mutations), protein aggregation is a feature, 
and this may be due in part to compromised autophagy. this possibility 
is supported by studies showing increased autophagosome numbers 
(compatible with decreased autophagosome–lysosome fusion) in the 
loa mice, and increased aggregation and toxicity of mutant huntingtin 
fragments when hd mice are crossed with the loa mice (or when the 
hd mutation is expressed in flies with hemizygous loss of either dynein 
heavy-chain or light-chain genes)47. although one cannot claim that 
defective autophagy is responsible for all of the pathology resulting from 
such mutations, by slowing the clearance of the aggregate-prone proteins 
and possibly increasing susceptibility to apoptosis, its contribution of 
dyneins is likely to be significant43,44. 
the chaperone-mediated autophagy pathway may also be relevant to 
neurodegeneration. wild-type α-synuclein has recently been shown to 
be selectively translocated into lysosomes for degradation by the cma 
pathway as well as being a substrate for the proteasome. in assays in vitro 
using isolated lysosomes, the pathogenic a53t and a30p α-synuclein 
mutant proteins were shown to bind to the cma-pathway receptor on 
the lysosomal membrane, but seem to act as uptake blockers, inhibit-
ing both their own degradation and that of other substrates53. it will be 
interesting to investigate whether similar effects are mediated by these 
mutations in vivo, because such a mechanism might contribute to their 
toxic gain of function. 
therapeutic strategies to reduce toxin synthesis
because many aggregate-prone proteins cause disease by gain-of-
function mechanisms, efforts have been made to explore therapeutic 
strategies that reduce the levels of such proteins, at either the synthe-
sis or degradation stage. promising progress has been made towards 
selective synthesis inhibition of dominant gain-of-function mutations, 
such as the mutant hd allele54, by rna-interference (rnai)-related 
approaches, as these strategies can discriminate targets that differ by a 
single nucleotide55. although this is theoretically attractive, there are 
a number of practical issues that still need to be resolved. first, safe, 
effective, long-term gene expression in the brain driven by viruses 
(or other possible vectors) remains a considerable challenge for gene 
therapy. second, long-term rnai may affect pathways unrelated to the 
782
 ©2006
nature  publishing group
nature|vol 443|19 october 2006
insight  review
gene of interest. third, if one is seeking to switch off the mutant allele 
in a polyglutamine disease, such as hd, without affecting the expres-
sion of the wild-type allele, this will probably require identification of 
a single-nucleotide polymorphism in the mutant allele that is differ-
ent from the wild-type allele (as it may be impossible to specifically 
target the mutant allele on the basis of recognition of the expanded 
cag repeats). such polymorphisms will differ between patients, so 
a number of knockdown vectors and possibly even custom-designed 
gene therapy will be required. the latter option may not be feasible, 
given the safety testing that such procedures may require. however, i 
believe that there are major theoretical advantages to the rnai-type 
approach that justify careful experimental assessment of its feasibility, 
as this strategy could have relevance to many diseases caused by gain-
of-function mutations.
enhancing autophagy as a therapeutic strategy
knowledge of the degradation pathways acting on the toxic proteins 
that cause various proteinopathies could help in the design of therapeu-
tic strategies. upregulating proteasome activity may not be desirable for 
a number of reasons. the proteasome degrades many key short-lived 
box 2 | schematic overview of key aspects of autophagy
autophagy begins with the formation of double-membrane-bounded 
autophagosomes. the origin(s) of the autophagosome membranes 
are unclear. the mammalian target of rapamycin (mtor) is a negative 
regulator of autophagosome formation, although how mtor regulates 
this process in mammals is not clear. when mtor is inhibited by 
rapamycin, autophagy is stimulated. 
autophagosomes fuse with lysosomes to form autophagolysosomes, 
a process that is governed by a number of factors, including dynein 
activity. the contents of autophagolysosomes are finally degraded by 
acidic lysosomal hydrolases. 
the green dots represent the protein lc3 (also known as atg8). this 
is the only known marker that specifically localizes to autophagosome 
and autophagolysosome membranes and not to other membranes. lc3 
localizes to these structures after it has been processed and conjugated 
to phosphatidylethanolamine.
??
isolation
membrane
autophagosome
dyneins
lysosome
autophagolysosome
breakdown
ub–proteasome
(inaccessable to
oligomers/aggregates)
autophagy
non-aggregate prone
aggregate prone
figure 2 | macroautophagy as a default pathway for proteasome-
inaccessible substrates.  when proteins are accessible to both the 
ubiquitin (ub)–proteasome and autophagy pathways, the greater efficiency 
of the ubiquitin–proteasome system makes it the favoured and dominant 
clearance route. when a cytosolic protein is aggregate prone and a poor 
proteasome substrate, then autophagy becomes the main clearance route 
by default — under these circumstances, the autophagy route becomes 
more effective than the proteasome.
intracellular regulators (for example, p53), whose steady-state levels are 
dependent on their degradation rates, which can be selectively modu-
lated by signals and post-translational modifications that influence 
processes such as ubiquitination. enhancing the degradation of such 
proteins may have other deleterious consequences (such as cancer, in 
the case of p53). however, one way that proteasome clearance of aggre-
gate-prone proteins might be enhanced without a corresponding effect 
on general ubiquitin–proteasome functioning could be to treat cells 
with chemical or molecular chaperones. by assisting normal folding 
and reducing aggregation of such proteins, chaperones shift the balance 
towards monomeric soluble forms (fig. 2). these forms can often be 
cleared by the proteasome. the theoretical prediction that chaperone 
treatments might enhance proteasome-mediated clearance of such pro-
teins and thereby reduce levels of the substrate is consistent with some 
experimental data56,57 . this strategy may be particularly valuable for 
clearing intranuclear proteins that are not accessible to autophagy.
upregulating autophagy may be tractable and less toxic, as autophagy 
substrates are typically long-lived proteins and are not believed to be 
selectively degraded, in contrast to many ubiquitin–proteasome sub-
strates. less marked changes would be expected in steady-state levels 
of long-lived proteins compared with proteins with short half-lives if 
their clearance were perturbed to similar extents and for equivalent 
times. upregulation of autophagy with the mtor inhibitor rapamy-
cin reduced levels of mutant soluble huntingtin (and aggregates) and 
attenuated mutant-huntingtin-fragment toxicity in cells, and in trans-
genic drosophila and mouse models11,21. we have confirmed that the 
main effect of rapamycin in this context occurs through autophagy20. 
subsequent studies have provided robust support for our assertions and 
suggest that autophagy is important even for the clearance of full-length 
mutant huntingtin, although it is not limiting for the clearance of its 
wild-type counterpart17–19. 
recent data from studies of cell and fly models show that autophagy 
upregulation might be valuable for reducing toxicity in many intracel-
lular proteinopathies other than hd, including those caused by poly-
glutamine expansions such as those seen in sca3, mutant forms of 
α-synuclein, and both mutant and wild-type tau20. thus, autophagy 
upregulation may be beneficial in other polyglutamine diseases, par-
kinson’s disease, and some forms of frontotemporal dementia.
rapamycin treatment of intracytosolic proteinopathies reduces the 
levels of soluble and aggregated proteins, in both cell and animal models, 
in an autophagy-dependent manner20. however, it is not clear whether 
autophagy clears only soluble species and oligomers, or whether it can 
also directly clear larger aggregates. our data — from mutant forms of 
α-synuclein that do not aggregate in the cell lines we used — suggest 
that this pathway can efficiently target species that are not in aggregates 
large enough to be seen with light microscopy12. the observation of 
inclusion formation in the neurons of mice with neuronally restricted 
autophagy-gene knockouts is consistent with the ability of autophagy 
to clear soluble and oligomeric aggregate precursors45,46. as these mice 
 ©2006
nature  publishing group
783
insight  review
nature|vol 443|19 october 2006
were otherwise normal, these inclusions presumably comprise wild-type 
cellular proteins that are not aggregate-prone under conditions allow-
ing autophagy, suggesting that these aggregates arose from the failure 
to clear soluble proteins, which aggregated when they exceeded critical 
levels. thus, the reduction we have observed in both soluble species 
and aggregates in hd-cell and animal models treated with rapamycin 
could be explained by a model in which autophagy does not not directly 
clear aggregates themselves but clears aggregate precursors. if these are 
removed, the equilibrium shifts away from aggregate formation. even 
large aggregates can be degraded if synthesis of the mutant protein is 
switched off (for example, the switching off of transgene expression in an 
inducible mouse model58 (fig. 3)). recent data have shown that hunting-
tin aggregates (which are much larger than typical autophagosomes) can 
be decorated with antibodies to the autophagosome-specific protein lc3 
or with yellow-fluorescent-protein labelled lc3 (refs 18, 59). although 
these studies did not test whether these inclusions were membrane-
bounded, and this does not seem to be the case from most publications 
in the field60, these observations raise the possibility that autophagic 
clearance of large aggregates may occur. in future, it will be important to 
demonstrate that these structures are indeed membrane-bounded and 
to quantify the contribution of this putative mechanism to the overall 
clearance of different aggregate-prone intracellular proteins.
in addition to rapamycin’s protective effect, which is mediated by 
enhanced clearance of the primary toxins — the aggregate-prone pro-
teins — the autophagy this drug induces may have other cytoprotective 
effects. rapamycin pretreatment protects cells and drosophila against 
various subsequent apoptotic insults44 — a protective effect that was lost 
when autophagy was inhibited. however, this protection was confined 
to apoptotic models relying on mitochondrial-dependent cytochrome 
c release for the activation of downstream caspases, and was not seen 
in cells dying through the mitochondrial independent death-receptor-
mediated pathway. consistent with these data, no additional protec-
tive effect of rapamycin was observed when cytochrome c release from 
mitochondria was blocked. a plausible mechanism for this protective 
effect of rapamycin is that autophagy enhances mitochondrial clear-
ance — we observed decreased levels of several mitochondrial proteins 
upon rapamycin pretreatment. after pro-apoptotic insults, we observed 
decreased levels of cytosolic cytochrome c and activated caspases in cells 
treated with rapamycin, consistent with reduced mitochondrial load. we 
proposed that the protective effect of rapamycin could be accounted for 
by enhanced clearance of mitochondria by autophagy, thereby reducing 
the release of cytosolic cytochrome c and activation of downstream cas-
pases after pro-apoptotic insults44. these data are also compatible with the 
suggestion that autophagy reduces susceptibility to oxidative stress61.
pro-autophagic treatments might therefore have two distinct benefi-
cial effects in protein conformational diseases. first, they could clear the 
primary toxin causing these diseases — the aggregate-prone protein. 
second, enhanced autophagy attenuates apoptotic responses to various 
insults. in a number of neurodegenerative conditions, such insults may 
include excitotoxicity. 
no studies have shown polyglutamine disease aggregates to be as 
benign as the wild-type protein. thus, even when aggregates seem to 
be less toxic than the soluble mutant protein62, they may be deleterious 
relative to the wild type. regardless of which of these models is correct, 
reducing the load of toxic proteins in the cell is likely to be beneficial, 
particularly because the induction of autophagy reduces levels of both 
soluble and aggregated species. 
perspectives
the prospect that autophagy upregulation could be of therapeutic value 
to a range of neurodegenerative diseases caused by aggregate-prone 
proteins raises various challenges. efficacy is likely to be greatest if treat-
ment is started as early as possible, with the aim of delaying disease 
onset. in monogenic diseases such as hd (in which the phenotype 
is closely associated with a specific mutated gene), identifying at-risk 
individuals is feasible by screening for the mutation at the dna level, 
as most cases will have family histories. if, in such cases, onset could 
be delayed until after normal life expectancy, disease would effectively 
have been prevented. it is also possible that degeneration might be more 
easily slowed if treatment is started earlier, providing another motiva-
tion for presymptomatic treatment approaches. however, the use of 
this strategy for the prevention of complex diseases would present the 
major challenge of identifying individuals at greatest risk unless a drug 
without serious side effects were used.
rapamycin is designed for long-term human use (for example, to pre-
vent renal transplant rejection63) and rapamycin analogues are in phase 
iii trials for the treatment of gliomas64,65. although rapamycin is the 
most specific kinase inhibitor known, its target, mtor, controls many 
processes independent of autophagy66. as a result, long-term rapamycin 
therapy is accompanied by side effects, including poor wound healing 
and a degree of immunosuppression. however, i am not aware of any side 
effects in humans that have been attributed to enhanced autophagy. so, 
although rapamycin may be worthy of consideration for the treatment 
of diseases such as hd, it would be desirable to find safer alternatives. 
these may include more specific targets downstream of mtor (as it is 
not clear which of its substrates regulate mammalian autophagy), or the 
identification of mtor-independent pathways. recently, we found that 
autophagy can be regulated in an mtor-independent manner by drugs 
that reduce intracellular inositol levels, such as lithium, valproate and 
carbamazepine67. our data suggest that greater levels of autophagy and 
aggregate-prone protein clearance can be induced by using drugs that 
target both pathways. combination therapy with more moderate mtor-
independent and mtor-dependent inhibition may be safer for long-term 
treatment than higher doses of drugs acting on either pathway. when used 
in combination, lower doses of each drug may achieve the same degree of 
overall autophagy induction, possibly providing a larger safety window. 
soluble
monomeric
oligomeric
aggregate
upregulation of autophagy by huntingtin aggregates
the protective effects of autophagy upregulation that rapamycin treat-
ment confers on cells containing protein aggregates seem to be mim-
icked by cells containing polyglutamine aggregates (in, for example, 
hd)21. in such cells, the aggregates sequester mtor, reducing levels 
of the soluble protein. this results in decreased mtor activity, and a 
consequent increase in autophagy. this phenomenon seems to be con-
fined to cells with aggregates, and is not seen in cells expressing soluble 
mutant protein. the ability of cells to induce autophagy when they 
contain polyglutamine aggregates may account for the observations that 
such mutant-huntingtin-aggregate-containing cells are less prone to 
cell death than cells expressing non-aggregated mutant polyglutamine 
proteins62. this may be due to the more rapid clearance of the soluble 
protein in such cells, leading to lower levels of diffuse huntingtin (which 
seems to correlate with lower toxicity62) and the protective effects of 
autophagy induction against subsequent pro-apoptotic insults44.
figure 3 | removal of aggregates can occur through removal of their 
precursors.  under normal conditions of substrate synthesis and basal 
autophagy, the direction of the equilibrium of an aggregate-prone protein 
is towards aggregate formation (grey arrows). if substrate synthesis is 
stopped (for example, in a conditional transgenic mouse) or clearance 
of the soluble/oligomeric forms is enhanced (for instance, by autophagy) 
then this equilibrium can be reversed and aggregates are indirectly 
cleared (red arrows).
784
 ©2006
nature  publishing group
nature|vol 443|19 october 2006
insight  review
it is difficult to be certain that prolonged upregulation of autophagy 
would be without risks. one theoretical concern is that enhanced mito-
chondrial turnover might be deleterious. steady-state levels of mito-
chondria are set when the absolute degradation rate equals the absolute 
synthetic rate. if absolute synthetic rates are fixed, and autophagy is 
induced, this increases the fractional degradation rate (analogous to 
decreasing half-life). the cells will then adjust to a new steady state, in 
which the absolute degradation rate is maintained as it was previously. 
this can be explained because the mitochondrial pool decreases, and 
the absolute degradation rate is a function of concentration as well as 
fractional degradation rate. in other words, the absolute degradation 
rate can stay the same in the presence of enhanced autophagy (frac-
tional degradation rate) when the mitochondrial load (concentration) 
drops. so, increasing autophagy decreases the mitochondrial load to a 
lower steady-state level but does not result in eventual total depletion 
of mitochondria (unless it is much more marked than the conditions 
we used)44. 
very large decreases in mitochondrial load may be associated with 
deleterious effects due to a decrease in oxidative phosphorylation. how-
ever, it should be noted that although such relationships are complex and 
tissue-dependent, the activities of some respiratory complexes can be 
reduced by 25–80% before respiration or atp synthesis in brain mito-
chondria are affected, and the activity of rat liver complex iii can be 
decreased by 45% before respiration is affected68. thus, it is likely to be 
possible to induce autophagy and reduce mitochondrial load to levels 
that have substantial protective effects against proteinopathies but do 
not affect respiration. 
although rapamycin-induced autophagy is likely to be relatively 
safe in the long term, a degree of caution may be required when using 
drugs that act on other pathways, particularly if the drugs have not been 
designed or tested for chronic use. for instance, overexpression of atg5 
induces autophagy accompanied by cell death, the latter of which seems 
to be mediated by atg5 interacting with fas-associated protein with 
death domain (fadd)69.
finally, clinical trials of strategies that prevent neurodegeneration are 
generally costly, requiring hundreds of cases to be monitored over peri-
ods of years to generate sufficient data from which to detect moderate 
effects. if we want to be able to prioritize strategies and refine protocols 
for such trials, or if we want to undertake meaningful presymptomatic 
trials, then we need to define and characterize biomarkers that allow 
quantification of presymptomatic pathology and early disease pro-
gression in smaller patient cohorts over shorter time periods than are 
required for trials based on overt clinical signs.  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
taylor, j. p., hardy, j. & fischbeck, k. h. toxic proteins in neurodegenerative disease. science 
296, 1991–1995 (2002).
ross, c. a. & poirier, m. a. what is the role of protein aggregation in neurodegeneration? 
nature rev. mol. cell biol. 6, 891–898 (2005).
perutz, m. f. & windle, a. h. cause of neural death in neurodegenerative diseases 
attributable to expansion of glutamine repeats. nature 412, 143–144 (2001).
pangalos, m. n., jacobsen, s. j. & reinhart, p. h. disease modifying strategies for the 
treatment of alzheimer’s disease targeted at modulating levels of the β-amyloid peptide. 
biochem. soc. trans. 33, 553–558 (2005).
5.  wellington, c. l. et al. caspase cleavage of mutant huntingtin precedes neurodegeneration 
6. 
in huntington’s disease. j. neurosci. 22, 7862–7872 (2002).
luo, s., vacher, c., davies, j. e. & rubinsztein, d. c. cdk5 phosphorylation of huntingtin 
reduces its cleavage by caspases: implications for mutant huntingtin toxicity. j. cell biol. 
169, 647–656 (2005).
7.  wellington, c. l. et al. caspase cleavage of gene products associated with triplet expansion 
disorders generates truncated fragments containing the polyglutamine tract. j. biol. chem. 
273, 9158–9167 (1998).
8.  ciechanover, a. the ubiquitin proteolytic system: from a vague idea, through basic 
9. 
mechanisms, and onto human diseases and drug targeting. neurology 66, s7–s19 (2006).
richly, h. et al. a series of ubiquitin binding factors connects cdc48/p97 to substrate 
multiubiquitylation and proteasomal targeting. cell 120, 73–84 (2005).
10.  weihl, c. c., dalal, s., pestronk, a. & hanson, p. i. inclusion body myopathy-associated 
mutations in p97/vcp impair endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation. hum. mol. 
genet. 15, 189–199 (2006).
11.  ravikumar, b., duden, r. & rubinsztein, d. c. aggregate-prone proteins with 
polyglutamine and polyalanine expansions are degraded by autophagy. hum. mol. genet. 
11, 1107–1117 (2002).
12.  webb, j. l., ravikumar, b., atkins, j., skepper, j. n. & rubinsztein, d. c. α-synuclein is 
degraded by both autophagy and the proteasome. j. biol. chem. 278, 25009–25013 
(2003).
13.  verhoef, l. g., lindsten, k., masucci, m. g. & dantuma, n. p. aggregate formation inhibits 
proteasomal degradation of polyglutamine proteins. hum. mol. genet. 11, 2689–2700 
(2002).
14.  venkatraman, p., wetzel, r., tanaka, m., nukina, n. & goldberg, a. l. eukaryotic 
proteasomes cannot digest polyglutamine sequences and release them during 
degradation of polyglutamine-containing proteins. mol. cell 14, 95–104 (2004). 
15.  holmberg, c. i., staniszewski, k. e., mensah, k. n., matouschek, a. & morimoto, r. i. 
inefficient degradation of truncated polyglutamine proteins by the proteasome. embo j. 
23, 4307–4318 (2004).
16.  yorimitsu, t. & klionsky, d. j. autophagy: molecular machinery for self-eating. cell death 
differ. 12, 1542–1552 (2005).
17.  shibata, m. et al. regulation of intracellular accumulation of mutant huntingtin by beclin 1. 
18. 
j. biol. chem. 281, 14474–14485 (2006).
iwata, a. et al. increased susceptibility of cytoplasmic over nuclear polyglutamine 
aggregates to autophagic degradation. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 102, 13135–13140 (2005).
19.  qin, z. h. et al. autophagy regulates the processing of amino terminal huntingtin 
fragments. hum. mol. genet. 12, 3231–3244 (2003).
20.  berger, z. et al. rapamycin alleviates toxicity of different aggregate-prone proteins. hum. 
mol. genet. 15, 433–442 (2006).
21.  ravikumar, b. et al. mtor inhibition induces autophagy and reduces toxicity of the 
huntington’s disease mutation in drosophila and mouse models. nature genet. 36, 585–
595 (2004).
22.  komatsu, m. et al. impairment of starvation-induced and constitutive autophagy in atg7-
deficient mice. j. cell biol. 169, 425–434 (2005).
23.  ravikumar, b. et al. raised intracellular glucose concentrations reduce aggregation and 
cell death caused by mutant huntingtin exon 1 by decreasing mtor phosphorylation and 
inducing autophagy. hum. mol. genet. 12, 985–994 (2003).
24.  rideout, h., lang-rollin, i. & stefanis, l. involvement of macroautophagy in the dissolution 
of neuronal inclusions. int. j. biochem. cell biol. 36, 2551–2562 (2004).
25.  massey, a., kiffin, r. & cuervo, a. m. pathophysiology of chaperone-mediated autophagy. 
int. j. biochem. cell biol. 36, 2420–2434 (2004).
26.  mcnaught, k. s., belizaire, r., isacson, o., jenner, p. & olanow, c. w. altered proteasomal 
function in sporadic parkinson’s disease. exp. neurol. 179, 38–46 (2003).
27.  seo, h., sonntag, k. c. & isacson, o. generalized brain and skin proteasome inhibition in 
huntington’s disease. ann. neurol. 56, 319–328 (2004).
28.  bence, n. f., sampat, r. m. & kopito, r. r. impairment of the ubiquitin–proteasome system 
by protein aggregation. science 292, 1552–1555 (2001).
29.  bowman, a. b., yoo, s. y., dantuma, n. p. & zoghbi, h. y. neuronal dysfunction in a 
polyglutamine disease model occurs in the absence of ubiquitin–proteasome system 
impairment and inversely correlates with a degree of nuclear inclusion formation. hum. 
mol. genet. 14, 679–691 (2005).
30.  diaz-hernandez, m. et al. neuronal induction of the immunoproteasome in huntington’s 
disease. j. neurosci. 23, 11653–11661 (2003).
31.  sun, x. m. et al. caspase activation inhibits proteasome function during apoptosis. mol. 
cell 14, 81–93 (2004).
32.  zhang, y. et al. parkin functions as an e2-dependent ubiquitin–protein ligase and promotes 
the degradation of the synaptic vesicle-associated protein, cdcrel-1. proc. natl acad. sci. 
usa 97, 13354–13359 (2000).
33.  shimura, h. et al. familial parkinson disease gene product, parkin, is a ubiquitin–protein 
34. 
ligase. nature genet. 25, 302–305 (2000).
imai, y., soda, m. & takahashi, r. parkin suppresses unfolded protein stress-induced cell 
death through its e3 ubiquitin–protein ligase activity. j. biol. chem. 275, 35661–35664 
(2000).
35.  leroy, e. et al. the ubiquitin pathway in parkinson’s disease. nature 395, 451–452 (1998).
36.  moore, d. j., west, a. b., dawson, v. l. & dawson, t. m. molecular pathophysiology of 
parkinson’s disease. annu. rev. neurosci. 28, 57–87 (2005).
37.  healy, d. g. et al. uchl-1 is not a parkinson’s disease susceptibility gene. ann. neurol. 59, 
627–633 (2006).
38.  liu, y., fallon, l., lashuel, h. a., liu, z. & lansbury, p. t. the uch-l1 gene encodes two 
opposing enzymatic activities that affect α-synuclein degradation and parkinson’s disease 
susceptibility. cell 111, 209–218 (2002).
39.  saigoh, k. et al. intragenic deletion in the gene encoding ubiquitin carboxy-terminal 
hydrolase in gad mice. nature genet. 23, 47–51 (1999).
40.  watts, g. d. et al. inclusion body myopathy associated with paget disease of bone and 
frontotemporal dementia is caused by mutant valosin-containing protein. nature genet. 
36, 377–381 (2004).
41.  mcnaught, k. s., perl, d. p., brownell, a. l. & olanow, c. w. systemic exposure to 
proteasome inhibitors causes a progressive model of parkinson’s disease. ann. neurol. 56, 
149–162 (2004).
42.  kuma, a. et al. the role of autophagy during the early neonatal starvation period. nature 
432, 1032–1036 (2004).
(2005).
43.  boya, p. et al. inhibition of macroautophagy triggers apoptosis. mol. cell biol. 25, 1025–1040 
44.  ravikumar, b., berger, z., vacher, c., o’kane, c. j. & rubinsztein, d. c. rapamycin pre-
treatment protects against apoptosis. hum. mol. genet. 15, 1209–1216 (2006).
45.  komatsu, m. et al. loss of autophagy in the central nervous system causes 
neurodegeneration in mice. nature 441, 880–884 (2006).
46.  hara, t. et al. suppression of basal autophagy in neural cells causes neurodegenerative 
disease in mice. nature 441, 885–889 (2006).
47.  ravikumar, b. et al. dynein mutations impair autophagic clearance of aggregate-prone 
proteins. nature genet. 37, 771–776 (2005).
48.  levy, j. r. et al. a motor neuron disease-associated mutation in p150glued perturbs dynactin 
function and induces protein aggregation. j. cell biol. 172, 733–745 (2006).
49.  puls, i. et al. mutant dynactin in motor neuron disease. nature genet. 33, 455–456 (2003).
50.  hafezparast, m. et al. mutations in dynein link motor neuron degeneration to defects in 
retrograde transport. science 300, 808–812 (2003).
51.  kieran, d. et al. a mutation in dynein rescues axonal transport defects and extends the life 
span of als mice. j. cell biol. 169, 561–567 (2005).
 ©2006
nature  publishing group
785
insight  review
nature|vol 443|19 october 2006
52.  ligon, l. a. et al. mutant superoxide dismutase disrupts cytoplasmic dynein in motor 
neurons. neuroreport 16, 533–536 (2005).
53.  cuervo, a. m., stefansi, l., fredenburg, r., lansbury, p. t. & sulzer, d. impaired degradation 
of mutant α-synuclein by chaperone-mediated autophagy. science 305, 1292–1295 (2004).
54.  harper, s. q. et al. rna interference improves motor and neuropathological abnormalities in 
a huntington’s disease mouse model. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 102, 5820–5825 (2005).
55.  rodriguez-lebron, e. & paulson, h. l. allele-specific rna interference for neurological 
disease. gene. ther. 13, 576–581 (2006).
56.  davies, j. e., sarkar, s. & rubinsztein, d. c. trehalose reduces aggregate formation and 
delays pathology in a transgenic mouse model of oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy. 
hum. mol. genet. 15, 23–31 (2006).
57.  sanchez, i., mahlke, c. & yuan, y. pivotal role of oligomerization in expanded polyglutamine 
neurodegenerative disorders. nature 421, 373–379 (2003).
58.  martin-aparicio, e. et al. proteasomal-dependent aggregate reversal and absence of cell 
death in a conditional mouse model of huntington’s disease. j. neurosci. 21, 8772–8781 
(2001).
59.  yamamoto, a., cremona, m. l. & rothman, j. e. autophagy-mediated clearance of 
huntingtin aggregates triggered by the insulin-signaling pathway. j. cell biol. 172, 719–731 
(2006).
60.  difiglia, m. et al. aggregation of huntingtin in neuronal intranuclear inclusions and 
dystrophic neurites in brain. science 277, 1990–1993 (1997).
61.  kiffin, r., bandyopadhyay, u. & cuervo, a. oxidative stress and autophagy. antioxid. redox 
signal. 8, 152–162 (2006).
62.  arrasate, m., mitra, s., schweitzer, e. s., segal, m. r. & finkbeiner, s. inclusion body 
formation reduces levels of mutant huntingtin and the risk of neuronal death. nature 431, 
805–810 (2004).
63.  lee, v. w. & chapman, j. r. sirolimus: its role in nephrology. nephrology (carlton) 10, 
606–614 (2005).
64.  bjornsti, m. a. & houghton, p. j. the tor pathway: a target for cancer therapy. nature rev. 
cancer 4, 335–348 (2004).
65.  galanis, e. et al. phase ii trial of temsirolimus (cci-779) in recurrent glioblastoma 
multiforme: a north central cancer treatment group study. j. clin. oncol. 23, 5294–5304 
(2005).
66.  wullschleger, s., loewith, r. & hall, m. n. tor signaling in growth and metabolism. cell 
124, 471–484 (2006).
67.  sarkar, s. et al. lithium induces autophagy by inhibiting inositol monophosphatase. j. cell 
biol. 170, 1101–1111 (2005).
68.  murphy, m. p. how understanding the control of energy metabolism can help 
investigation of mitochondrial dysfunction, regulation and pharmacology. biochim. 
biophys. acta 1504, 1–11 (2001).
69.  pyo, j. et al. essential roles of atg5 and fadd in autophagic cell death: dissection of 
autophagic cell death into vacuole formation and cell death. j. biol. chem. 280, 20722–
20728 (2005).
70.  nasir, j. et al. targeted disruption of the huntington’s disease gene results in embryonic 
lethality and behavioural and morphological changes in heterozygotes. cell 81, 811–823 
(1995).
71.  zeitlin, s. et al. increased apoptosis and early embryonic lethality in mice nullizygous for 
the huntington’s disease gene homolog. nature genet. 11, 155–163 (1995).
72.  duyao, m. p. et al. inactivation of the mouse huntington’s disease gene homolog hdh. 
science 269, 407–410 (1995).
73.  harper, p. s. huntington’s disease 2nd edn (wb saunders, london, 1996).
74.  rubinsztein, d. c. lessons from animal models of huntington’s disease. trends genet. 18, 
202–209 (2002).
75.  ordway, j. m. et al. ectopically expressed cag repeats cause intranuclear inclusions and 
a progressive late onset neurological phenotype in the mouse. cell 91, 753–763 (1997).
76.  cattaneo, e., zuccato, c. & tartari, m. normal huntingtin function: an alternative 
approach to huntington’s disease. nature rev. neurosci. 6, 919–930 (2005).
acknowledgements i am grateful to b. ravikumar and m. futter for critical 
comments on the manuscript and l. smith for help with manuscript preparation. 
the work in my laboratory covered by this review has been funded by a wellcome 
trust senior fellowship in clinical science, a medical research council (mrc) 
programme grant, wyeth, and european union framework vi (eurosca).
author information reprints and permissions information is available at 
npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions. the author declares competing 
financial interests: details accompany the paper at www.nature.com/nature. 
correspondence should be addressed to the author (dcr1000@hermes.cam.ac.uk).
786
 ©2006
nature  publishing group