cardiovascular research 73 (2007) 470 – 480
www.elsevier.com/locate/cardiores
review
phagocytosis in atherosclerosis: molecular mechanisms and implications
for plaque progression and stability
dorien m. schrijvers ⁎, guido r.y. de meyer, arnold g. herman, wim martinet
division of pharmacology, university of antwerp, universiteitsplein 1, b-2610 wilrijk, belgium
received 18 may 2006; received in revised form 1 september 2006; accepted 8 september 2006
available online 16 september 2006
time for primary review 17 days
abstract
macrophages play a key role in atherosclerotic plaque destabilization and rupture. in this light, selective removal of macrophages may be
beneficial for plaque stability. however, macrophages are phagocytic cells and thus have an important additional role in scavenging of
modified lipoproteins, unwanted or dead cells and cellular debris via phagocytosis. the concept of phagocytosis as well as the underlying
mechanisms is well defined but the effect of phagocytosis in terms of plaque stability remains poorly understood. recent findings point
towards a complex role of macrophage phagocytosis in atherogenesis. macrophages are necessary for removal of apoptotic cells from
plaques, but exert strong proatherogenic properties upon phagocytosis of lipoproteins, erythrocytes and platelets. apart from heterophagy,
autophagocytosis better known as autophagy may occur in advanced atherosclerotic plaques. several lines of evidence indicate that
autophagy is initiated in plaque smooth muscle cells as a result of cellular distress. since autophagy is well recognized as a survival
mechanism, autophagic smooth muscle cells in the fibrous cap may reflect an important feature underlying plaque stability. all together,
phagocytosis is a crucial process involved in atherogenesis that may significantly affect the stability of the atherosclerotic plaque.
© 2006 european society of cardiology. published by elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.
keywords: atherosclerosis; phagocytosis; lipoproteins; apoptosis; plague stability
1. introduction
one of the earliest events in atherosclerosis is the entry of
monocytes into the arterial intima [1]. these monocytes
differentiate into macrophages and start to accumulate large
amounts of lipid through the uptake of modified lipoproteins
which results in foam cell formation. macrophage-derived
foam cells in turn stimulate smooth muscle cell (smc)
migration from the media into the intima, and in this way
contribute to the progression of atherosclerosis. at this point,
the atherosclerotic lesion is considered stable. it consists of a
small necrotic core, if present at all, separated from the blood
flow by a firm fibrous cap of smcs and extracellular matrix.
however, the release of matrix metalloproteinases by macro-
phages in the plaque leads to progressive collagen break-
⁎ corresponding author. tel.: +32 3 820 27 10; fax: +32 3 820 25 67.
e-mail address: dorien.schrijvers@ua.ac.be (d.m. schrijvers).
down and thinning of the fibrous cap. they also produce pro-
inflammatory cytokines with pro-apoptotic potential which
may contribute to cell death of surrounding cells. accord-
ingly, stable atherosclerotic lesions slowly progress over a
period of decades to advanced and unstable lesions. these
lesions are characterized by a thin fibrous cap containing few
smcs overlying a large necrotic core composed of dead
cells, lipid deposits and cellular debris. in contrast to stable
lesions, advanced human atherosclerotic plaques also show
intraplaque neovascularization. these newly formed vessels
are fragile and often reveal signs of leakage, thereby intro-
ducing platelets and red blood cells into the plaque [2].
the presence of macrophages, however, may not be
entirely detrimental for the structure of the plaque. macro-
phages are also professional phagocytes and thus designed to
remove pathogens, small particles as well as dead or da-
maged cells from the atherosclerotic tissue via phagocytosis.
although the concept of this process is known for decades
0008-6363/$ - see front matter © 2006 european society of cardiology. published by elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.cardiores.2006.09.005
d.m. schrijvers et al. / cardiovascular research 73 (2007) 470–480
471
and the mechanisms underlying phagocytosis are well de-
fined [3], the link with the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis
remains poorly understood. in this review, we have outlined
some of the most interesting recent findings concerning
phagocytosis of lipoproteins, apoptotic cells, red blood cells
and platelets by macrophages in atherosclerotic plaques and
how this may affect plaque progression and stability. fur-
thermore, we present evidence for the initiation of auto-
phagocytosis in atherosclerosis.
2. phagocytosis of lipoproteins
low density lipoproteins (ldl) are the main source of
excess cholesterol deposition in foam cells. in early lesions,
foam cells are derived from macrophages, but in more ad-
vanced lesions, also smcs can undergo foam cell trans-
formation. the latter phenomenon can be explained, at least
in part, by the finding that hypoxia, due to increased wall
thickness and reduced oxygen diffusion [4], significantly
increases ldl uptake and lipid accumulation in smcs [5].
because uptake of native ldl via the ldl receptor (ldlr)
is subject to negative feedback regulation, accumulation of
excessive amounts of ldl-derived cholesterol by macro-
phages is thought to require modification of ldl that per-
mits rapid unregulated internalization [6]. several types of
ldl modification have been shown to permit cholesterol
uptake in vitro, which includes acetylation, oxidation and
aggregation, producing acetylated ldl (acldl), oxidized
ldl (oxldl) and aggregated ldl (agldl), respectively
[7–9]. acetylation of ldl in vitro can induce cholesterol
accumulation in macrophages. however, there is no evi-
dence that acetylation of ldl occurs to any extent in vivo. in
contrast, oxidative modification of ldl, catalyzed by all
major cell types found in arterial lesions including endo-
thelial cells, smcs and macrophages, is believed to be the
main inducer of foam cell formation and initiation of ath-
erogenesis. moreover, macrophages can promote oxidation
and thus uptake of ldl through exocytosis of iron, derived
from previously phagocytized structures (e.g. aged or
damaged erythrocytes) [10]. apart from oxidation of ldl,
aggregation of ldl may take place in the arterial wall [11]
where it is associated with proteoglycan secretion by macro-
phages [12]. moreover, modification of the ldl surface by
sphingomyelinase, phospholipase a2 or phospholipase c
results in loss of ldl stability and contributes to its
aggregation.
although macrophages exhibit abundant receptors for
lipoproteins that have been altered by chemical modification
or by complexing with other molecules [13], macrophages
express only few receptors for native plasma lipoproteins. as
a consequence, native ldl enters macrophages predomi-
nantly via endocytosis. this process requires formation of
clathrin-coated vesicles and occurs independent of actin
polymerization. in contrast, agldl, acldl and oxldl are
internalized through receptor mediated phagocytosis which
occurs by an clathrin-independent mechanism but is atp- and
(sra). however,
actin-dependent and involves formation of pseudopodia.
acldl and oxldl are both ligands for the scavenger
receptor class a type i/ii
there is
considerable evidence for the existence of morphologically
and functionally distinct uptake pathways that deliver these
two ligands to different endocytic compartments. this is most
likely due to the involvement of different receptors. app-
roximately 80% of acldl phagocytosis is mediated by sra,
whereas 70% of the oxldl uptake is mediated by receptors
different from sra (e.g. cd36 [14], macrosialin/cd68 [15]
and lectin-like oxidized low density lipoprotein receptor-1
(lox-1) [16]) (fig. 1). mild oxidation of ldl produces
minimally modified ldl (mmldl), which is still recognized
by the ldl receptor but not by the scavenger receptors. it
binds specifically to cd14 (lps receptor) and induces
enhanced cd36 expression, which leads to enhanced uptake
of oxldl [17]. in smcs, the scavenger receptors are barely
expressed, but ldl receptor-related protein 1 (lrp1) is
fig. 1. phagocyte recognition of lipoproteins (ldl), apoptotic cells (ac),
red blood cells (rbc) and platelets (plt). several receptors on the
phagocyte membrane are involved in the phagocytic process. they interact
ligands or via bridging molecules. cd14,
either directly with their
lipopolysaccharide receptor; lox-1,
lectin-like oxidized low density
lipoprotein receptor-1; cd36, thrombospondin receptor; cd68, macrosialin;
sra, scavenger receptor class a; fcr, fc fragment of immunoglobulin g
receptor; lrp, ldl receptor-related protein; srec, scavenger receptor of
endothelial cells; marco, macrophage receptor with collagenous structure;
cd91, calreticulin; gas-6, growth arrest-specific gene 6; β2-gpi, beta 2-
glycoprotein 2; abc-1, atp-binding cassette-1; tsp, thrombospondin; ps,
phosphatidylserine; psr, ps receptor; αvβ3, vitronectin receptor.
472
d.m. schrijvers et al. / cardiovascular research 73 (2007) 470–480
highly expressed [18]. lrp1 is upregulated by hypercholes-
terolemia and mediates uptake of aggregated lipoproteins in
this type of cells. a different mode of agldl entry has been
described. agldl induces plasma membrane invaginations
that deliver agldl into a labyrinth of surface-connected
compartments, a process called patocytosis [19]. the process
is actin-dependent and occurs independently of the ldl
receptor.
after phagocytosis, lipoproteins are efficiently delivered
to lysosomes where their degradation occurs [6]. however,
oxldl protein is partially resistant to lysosomal degradation
and accumulates along with oxldl cholesterol within the
macrophage lysosomes [20]. this accumulation is, at least
partly, responsible for the transformation of macrophages
into foam cells. foam cell formation in atherosclerotic
plaques is initiated when the cholesterol removal becomes
limited, either because the amount of plasma cholesterol that
enters the arterial wall
is too large for macrophages to
process, or because the ability of macrophages to excrete
cholesterol becomes limited (e.g. low bio-availability of high
density lipoproteins [hdl]). therefore, by lowering the
level of plasma lipoproteins or by increasing the plasma
levels of hdl, accumulation and phagocytosis of excess
amounts of lipoproteins in the arterial wall are prevented.
it is generally well accepted that accumulation of lipo-
proteins in the vessel wall, in particular oxldl, contributes
to apoptotic and /or necrotic cell death [21]. it remains,
however, unclear whether oxldl stimulates cell death upon
binding to the cell surface or after phagocytosis. recent
evidence suggests that oxldl-induced macrophage cell
death does not require uptake of oxldl and probably occurs
upon binding to the cell surface. firstly, it is known that
aggregation enhances uptake of oxldl by macrophages via
sra and that it decreases oxldl-induced cell injury [22].
secondly, inhibitors of phagocytosis such as cytochalasin b
and d and latrunculin a, prevent uptake of oxldl and
subsequently restore oxldl-induced cytotoxicity [22]. in
this regard, enhanced phagocytosis of oxidized and/or
aggregated ldl not only contributes to foam cell formation,
but also to plaque progression and formation of an unstable
plaque phenotype due to macrophage survival. in line with
these findings it is important to note that oxldl stimulates
endothelial cells to produce a number of pro-inflammatory
molecules such as adhesion molecules and growth factors,
resulting in the recruitment of monocytes to the vessel wall
[23]. in addition, oxldl modulates gene expression in
macrophage-derived foam cells [24]. pro-inflammatory
genes such as interleukin-8 (il-8) are upregulated whereas
tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (timps) are down-
regulated. furthermore, macrophage-derived foam cells
isolated from hypercholesterolemic rabbits produce reactive
oxygen species (ros) that activate the latent zymogen of
matrix metalloproteinase-2 [25], thereby inducing a shift
towards weakening of the fibrous cap. at present, it is
unknown whether these effects occur upon binding of
oxldl to macrophages or after phagocytosis.
despite the detrimental effects of foam cell formation in
plaque macrophages on atherogenesis, approaches that target
pharmacological management of atherosclerosis through the
use of acyl-coenzyme a:cholesterol acyltransferase 1
(acat1) inhibitors and inhibition of foam cell formation
paradoxically report
increased atherosclerosis [26,27].
acat1 esterifies free cholesterol after intracellular degra-
dation of lipoproteins so that it can be stored as lipid droplets
in macrophages. inhibition of acat1 may reduce the
cholesterol burden in plaque macrophages through increased
efflux of free cholesterol
into the hdl pathway, but
inefficient efflux or compartmentalization of free cholesterol
to sites disconnected from the efflux machinery may induce
macrophage apoptosis owing to the toxic effects of free
cholesterol [28]. increased generation of apoptotic cells may
stimulate atherogenesis as outlined below.
3. phagocytosis of apoptotic cells
types,
advanced atherosclerotic lesions are characterized by the
presence of apoptotic cells (ac) derived from a variety of
cell
including macrophages, t lymphocytes and
smcs [29]. mechanisms involved in the initiation of apo-
ptosis include accumulation of high concentrations of intra-
cellular free cholesterol and extracellular oxldl, production
of pro-apoptotic cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-α
(tnf-α) and the release of excessive amounts of ros by
macrophages, growth factor withdrawal, hypoxia and direct
cell–cell interactions (e.g. binding of fas-ligand to fas) [30].
when cells undergo apoptosis, they are rapidly recognized
and phagocytized by professional phagocytes, such as
macrophages and dendritic cells. phagocytosis of ac in-
hibits the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines by
macrophages such as il-1β, il-8 and tnf-α through a
suppressive mechanism involving the autocrine/paracrine
secretion of transforming growth factor-β (tgf-β) [31,32].
tgf-β secretion in turn inhibits recruitment of circulating
monocytes [33]. in addition, ac phagocytosis strongly
inhibits expression of the pro-inflammatory il-12 family of
cytokines (il-12, il-23, il-27) whereas the production of
the anti-inflammatory cytokine il-10 is stimulated [34]. in
this way, tissues are protected from harmful exposure to
inflammatory responses as well as from the immunogenic
content of the dying cells after undergoing postapoptotic
necrosis.
ac express many cell surface changes which may serve
as “eat me” signals for recognition by macrophages (fig. 1).
a large number of surface molecules, ligands and receptors
have also been identified on the macrophage [3,35–38]. the
best characterized recognition mechanism is the exposure of
phosphatidylserine (ps) on ac [39–42], directly followed
by binding of ps to the ps receptor on the macrophage
membrane [43,44]. interestingly, a number of ps-binding
proteins exist that can act as a bridge between ac and
macrophages (fig. 1). among these bridge molecules, it is
worth mentioning (i) plasma–protein β2-glycoprotein 1 (β2-
d.m. schrijvers et al. / cardiovascular research 73 (2007) 470–480
473
gpi), (ii) growth arrest-specific gene 6 (gas6) protein that
binds to the mer kinase and (iii) milk-fat globule epidermal
growth factor 8 (mfg-e8, also known as lactadherine) that
connects vitronectin receptor integrin (αvβ3) to ps (fig. 1).
this multiplicity of ways in which phagocytes recognize and
engulf ac suggests that a hierarchy of engulfment mechan-
isms and back-up systems may exist. indeed, upon blocking
ps with a specific antibody or annexin v, phagocytosis of
ac decreases but this inhibition is never complete, sug-
gesting cooperation between different recognition mechan-
isms [45]. it should be noted that exposure of ps has been
documented on many different cell types undergoing apo-
ptosis. some membrane changes, however, have only been
described in certain cell types (e.g. expression of altered
carbohydrates on apoptotic thymocytes and hepatocytes,
icam-3 expression on apoptotic b-cells and loss of cd16
on apoptotic neutrophils).
recent evidence suggests that phagocytosis of ac by
macrophages is impaired in atherosclerosis. one of the first
discoveries in the quest for possible mechanisms that con-
tribute to defective clearance of ac in atherosclerosis was
made by steinberg, witztum and coworkers, who showed
that oxldl competes with ac for macrophage binding
(fig. 2). ac and oxldl share oxidatively modified moieties
on their surfaces that serve as ligands for macrophage
recognition [46,47]. moreover, oxldl is immunogenic and
anti-oxldl auto-antibodies are commonly found in athero-
sclerotic lesions of both animals and patients [48]. these
auto-antibodies also specifically bind to the surface of
apoptotic cells, but not to normal cells, thereby inhibiting
their phagocytosis by macrophages [49]. another factor that
contributes to diminished phagocytosis of ac in atheroscle-
rotic plaques is the presence of oxidative stress mediators
such as peroxynitrite. recent evidence indicates that the
peroxynitrite donor sin1a concentration-dependently de-
creases phagocytosis of ac in vitro [50]. ps or other
membrane associated factors present on macrophages or ac
that are required for phagocytosis may be sensitive to
oxidative treatment. furthermore, accumulation of indigest-
ible particles in the cytoplasm of macrophages results in a
nearly complete inhibition of ac phagocytosis [50]. moller
et al. reported that uptake of indigestible, rigid particles by
macrophages induces cellular ‘stiffening’ so that changes in
cellular shape, which are needed to form pseudopodia for
phagocytosis, are inhibited [51]. electron microscopy
images from macrophage-derived foam cells in atheroscle-
rotic plaques show that these cells are often crammed with
large lipid droplets. because accumulation of indigestible
debris in the cytoplasm of macrophages inhibits phagocy-
tosis,
these lipid-laden
is tempting to speculate that
it
fig. 2. schematic overview of the different mechanisms that are responsible for diminished phagocytosis of apoptotic cells (ac) by macrophages in
atherosclerotic plaques. (1) the cell death stimulus that results in the formation of ac determines the extent to which dying cells are recognized and removed by
phagocytes. (2) oxidative stress exerted by peroxynitrite (and probably also other ros) inhibits phagocytosis of ac by macrophages. (3) monoclonal auto-
antibodies to various epitopes of oxldl bind specifically to the surface of ac and not to normal cells. once bound, these antibodies profoundly inhibit uptake of
ac by macrophages. (4) both oxrbc and oxldl compete with ac for the same epitopes on the surface of macrophages, thereby profoundly inhibiting ac
phagocytosis. (5) free cholesterol loading in macrophages downregulates the secretion of lactadherine, a macrophage-derived molecule that facilitates
phagocytosis of ac. (6) accumulation of indigestible material (e.g. lipid droplets in foam cells) causes macrophage ‘stiffening’, thereby decreasing macrophage
phagocytosis capacity.
474
d.m. schrijvers et al. / cardiovascular research 73 (2007) 470–480
macrophages are no longer able to engulf ac (“full is full”).
however, it should be noted that in vitro generated foam
cells (e.g. macrophages after phagocytosis of agldl or
platelets) can efficiently engulf ac because the degree of
foam cell formation as observed in plaques is very hard to
accomplish in vitro. in addition, cholesterylester-loaded
macrophages, the most prominent type of phagocytes in
early lesions, can effectively recognize and ingest ac [52].
also of note, secretion of mfg-e8, a macrophage-derived
molecule that
is
downregulated upon free cholesterol-loading in macro-
phages [54]. finally, it is worth mentioning that success or
failure of adequate ac phagocytosis is determined not only
by phagocyte availability, but also by the nature of the cell
death trigger [55]. indeed, ac are not equally marked for
safe clearance, which implies that clearance of ac depends
on the cell death initiator that is used.
facilitates phagocytosis of ac [53],
reduced uptake of ac promotes a number of processes
that may contribute to plaque instability (fig. 3). firstly,
impaired phagocytosis of ac results in enhanced secretion
of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including tnf-α and il-12,
and a reduced release of anti-inflammatory proteins such as
tgf-β and il-10. deregulated expression of these cytokines
may result in inflammatory autoimmune responses, as seen
in systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis,
two nonatherosclerotic inflammatory disorders with a similar
defect in ac phagocytosis by macrophages. secondly, ps
often becomes oxidized during apoptosis. these oxidized
phospholipids are known to induce secretion of pro-inflam-
matory proteins such as mcp-1 and il-8, thereby contrib-
uting to a persistent state of chronic inflammation [56].
thirdly, tissue factor (tf) expression colocalizes with ac,
especially around the lipid core of human atherosclerotic
plaques [57,58]. tf is a key element in the initiation of the
coagulation cascade and mediates thrombus formation after
rupture of an unstable plaque, when free ac are exposed to
the blood stream. it binds coagulation factor vii and its
activated form factor viia. this complex proteolytically
fig. 3. schematic overview of the differential effects of phagocytosis by macrophages on plaque progression and stability. one of the earliest events in
atherosclerosis is the retention of ldl in the intima, where ldl transforms into aggregated or oxidized ldl (agldl and oxldl, respectively). uptake of
modified ldl protects macrophages (mφ) against oxldl cytotoxicity but results in foam cell formation and plaque progression. binding of oxldl to mφ
stimulates cell death. apoptotic cell death is a prominent feature of advanced plaques. in general, mφ clear apoptotic cells (ac) via phagocytosis prevent
inflammatory reactions caused by secondary necrosis of ac. however, phagocytosis of ac in plaques is severely impaired in various ways (e.g. oxldl and
oxidized red blood cells compete with ac for binding on the ps receptor; see also fig. 2). accordingly, ac remain unremoved and contribute to plaque
progression. moreover, phosphatidylserine (ps) exposed on the surface of ac can initiate thrombus formation upon contact with platelets (plt). these plts
enter the plaque through leaky neovessels or after plaque rupture and are phagocytized by mφ. platelet phagocytosis activates macrophages (as shown by
upregulation of inducible nitric oxide synthase (inos) and secretion of tnfα) and contributes to an unstable plaque phenotype. leaky neovessels also release
red blood cells (rbc) in the plaque. rbc are rapidly oxidized and phagocytized by mφ. upon phagocytosis of oxrbc, ceroid depositions accumulate in the
mφ cytoplasm. moreover, oxrbc uptake leads to macrophage activation and exocytosis of iron. extracellular iron has the ability to oxidize ldl resulting in
further plaque destabilization.
d.m. schrijvers et al. / cardiovascular research 73 (2007) 470–480
475
activates factors ix and x, which in turn leads to thrombin
generation. tf activity is highly dependent on the presence
of ps because ps increases the catalytic activity of the tf/
factor viia complex [59]. finally, expansion of the necrotic
core is stimulated due to secondary necrosis of free ac. the
interaction of macrophages with necrotic cells often results
in an additional inflammatory response [60].
the exact number of non-phagocytized ac required for a
detectable inflammatory response is presently unknown. it is
therefore unclear whether free ac in advanced human
atherosclerotic plaques are frequent enough to induce sig-
nificant inflammation. there are, however, several lines of
evidence that accumulation of free ac in plaques contributes
to lesion progression. the impact of impaired phagocytosis of
ac on atherogenesis was recently demonstrated in different
mouse models. for example, aortic valve lesions in ldlr−/−
recipients of transglutaminase 2 (tg2)−/− bone marrow are
larger than in recipients of tg2+/+ bone marrow [61]. tg2
deficiency fundamentally impairs the capacity of macro-
phages to ingest apoptotic cells [62] which supports the
general hypothesis that accumulation of undigested ac may
function as a pro-inflammatory factor that stimulates ex-
pansion of atherosclerotic plaques. besides tg2, apolipo-
protein e (apoe) modulates clearance of ac both in vitro and
in vivo, resulting in a systemic pro-inflammatory state in
apoe−/− mice,
its role in lipoprotein
metabolism [33]. in addition, gld.apoe−/− mice, lacking the
genes for fas-ligand and apolipoprotein e, have high levels
of free ac in tissues and in the circulation which was due, at
least in part, to an impaired ability to scavenge apoptotic
debris [63]. these mice display enhanced atherosclerosis
compared with apoe−/− mice.
independent of
4. erythrophagocytosis
intraplaque hemorrhage is common in advanced human
atherosclerotic plaques and arises from the disruption of thin-
walled microvessels penetrating the atherosclerotic lesion
from the adventitial microvascular network through the
media into the thickened intima [2]. acute hemorrhagic
events may also occur after rupture of the fibrous cap. these
events promote infiltration of erythrocytes and deposition of
large amounts of iron. it is presently unclear why newly
formed microvessels become fragile and prone to rupture.
possibly, ongoing inflammation, release of matrix-degrading
metalloproteinases by macrophages or proteases secreted by
mast cells are responsible for proteolytic damage of the
microvessels [64,65]. once inside the plaque, erythrocytes
rapidly undergo lipid peroxidation followed by phagocytosis
via macrophages. binding and phagocytosis of oxidized red
blood cells (oxrbc) by macrophages are predominantly
mediated by ps recognition but the macrophage receptors
that are involved remain to be elucidated (fig. 1). im-
portantly, oxrbc competes with both oxldl and ac for
macrophage binding since they all share oxidatively modi-
fied moieties on their surface that serve as ligands for
macrophage recognition (fig. 2) [46,47,66]. upon phago-
cytosis of oxrbc in vitro, macrophages (i) transform to
foam cells, (ii) become activated as indicated by elevated
inos activity and (iii) produce autofluorescent pigment with
the characteristics of ceroid (insoluble mixture of oxidized
lipids and proteins) that can be found frequently in foam cells
around microvessels in human plaques (fig. 3)
[67].
loegering et al. reported that phagocytosis of igg coated
erythrocytes inhibits certain macrophage functions, includ-
ing the respiratory burst, killing of bacteria as well as pha-
gocytosis itself [68]. a challenge of macrophages with igg
coated erythrocytes is followed by an increase in lipid
peroxidation as assessed by thiobarbituric acid-reactive
substances (tbars). since phagocytosis of igg coated
erythrocyte ghosts lacking iron-containing hemoglobin does
not affect macrophage function, it is tempting to speculate
that iron may interact with ros of the macrophage respi-
ratory burst to cause oxidative damage to the macrophage.
however, several lines of evidence question this theory.
first, phagocytosis of igg coated erythrocytes fails to de-
plete glutathione, suggesting that the level of oxidative stress
is minimal
iron is exocytosed by the
macrophage and gives rise to fenton reactions outside the
cell, thereby triggering peroxidation of ldl and formation
of extracellular ceroid deposits [70,71]. thirdly, phagocytic
challenge with complement coated erythrocytes causes
neither an increase in tbars nor an inhibition of macro-
phage function [69]. it should be noted that an increase in
tbars following complement receptor mediated phagocy-
tosis of erythrocytes may occur when the respiratory burst is
stimulated with phorbol myristate acetate (pma) [68]. this
finding suggests that hemoglobin iron and phagocyte
generated oxidants may collaborate to induce inhibition of
macrophage function following erythrocyte phagocytosis.
[69]. secondly,
5. phagocytosis of platelets
besides erythrocytes, platelets can infiltrate in the athe-
rosclerotic plaque via leakage and/or rupture of newly
formed microvessels. subsequent clearance of platelets by
macrophages is mediated through class a scavenger recep-
tors (fig. 1) [72]. cell surface expression of ps by platelets
suggests that phagocytosis also involves the ps receptor.
moreover, cd36 might be required in platelet recognition by
macrophages as cd36 associates with cd9 and integrins on
human platelets [72]. phagocytosis of platelets by macro-
phages is known as an alternative mechanism of foam cell
formation [73,74]. a recent study, however, established a
link between platelet phagocytosis and macrophage activa-
tion via proteolytic processing of platelet-derived amyloid
precursor protein (app) and generation of β-amyloid (aβ)-
like peptides [74]. hitherto, app and aβ have been inves-
tigated almost exclusively in brain tissue from patients with
alzheimer's disease. nonetheless, app is abundantly pre-
sent in α-granules of platelets and consequently also ac-
cumulates along with app derived fragments in human
476
d.m. schrijvers et al. / cardiovascular research 73 (2007) 470–480
atherosclerotic plaques, more specifically in macrophages
associated with platelet phagocytosis in the vicinity of
neovascularization [74]. these macrophages often express
inos, suggesting that app and its processing to aβ(-like)
peptides can play a major role in macrophage activation after
platelet phagocytosis. the finding that platelet phagocytosis
evokes macrophage activation in advanced human athero-
sclerotic plaques and the possible role of app and aβ(-like)
peptide(s) in this process has been confirmed in cell culture
experiments [74]. phagocytosis of platelets by ifnγ-primed
mouse j774 macrophages or human thp-1 monocytes in
vitro, as demonstrated with confocal microscopy, leads to
macrophage activation, as indicated by the upregulation of
inos mrna and protein in the macrophages and the pro-
duction of high amounts of nitrite and tnf-α (fig. 3).
because uptake of platelets from app knockout mice by
macrophages does not result in macrophage activation [75],
app or derived fragments can be considered the effector
molecules that induce macrophage activation after platelet
phagocytosis. interestingly, macrophage activation after
platelet phagocytosis is increased in the presence of throm-
bin, which is a substance that evokes platelet degranulation.
in this light, it can be assumed that platelets not necessarily
need to be phagocytized by macrophages to mediate their
activation. interaction with plaque collagen that activates
platelets might be sufficient to induce app and aβ release.
the observation that a rim of platelets often surrounds inos-
positive plaque macrophages without clear signs of inter-
nalization supports this view [74].
6. autophagocytosis
autophagocytosis, also known as macroautophagy or
simply autophagy, is a regulated mechanism for bulk degra-
dation of long-lived proteins and the only way known for the
degradation of organelles [76]. the process of autophagy
involves the formation of autophagic vacuoles, named
autophagosomes, containing portions of the cytoplasm and
organelles typically surrounded by two membrane layers.
autophagosomes fuse with pre-existing lysosomes and
mature to become degradative autolysosomes. the content
and inner membranes are then degraded by lysosomal
hydrolases. in most cells, autophagy is suppressed to a basal
level, but under specific conditions of stress (e.g. starvation,
cellular injury, treatment with certain hormones or toxic
chemicals) formation of autophagosomes is induced. this
suggests that autophagy is in the first place an adaptive
survival mechanism that allows a mechanism for recycling
of cellular components in addition to its catabolic role pro-
viding energy in times of famine. however, when autophagy
is triggered continuously, progressive degradation of vital
cytoplasmic components will occur and the cell will literally
digest itself to death as a suicide strategy. although auto-
phagy in mammalian cells is known for at least forty years,
we are only beginning to understand its physiological role
and participation in different human pathologies. this is at
is currently an established marker
least partly related to the fact that only a limited number of
specific marker proteins and diagnostic methods are avail-
able to monitor the autophagic process [77]. nevertheless,
some observations indicate that autophagy may be involved
in human atherosclerosis. transmission electron microscopy
of disintegrating smcs in the fibrous cap reveals certain
features of ‘programmed’ cell death unrelated to apoptosis
but typical of autophagy, such as formation of myelin figures
[78] and severe vacuolization [79] (fig. 4a,b). the latter
phenomenon was already described in dying smcs by
stehbens as granulovesicular degeneration [80]. more
recently, kockx and herman classified these cells as type
c smcs [81] and considered them similar to dying smcs
found in unstable plaques of saphenous vein grafts [82].
interestingly, vacuolated smcs in the fibrous cap often
contain granular ubiquitin inclusions in their cytoplasm
representing insoluble protein aggregates of diverse origin
(fig. 4c–e) [83]. accumulation of ubiquitinated inclusions
in the cytosol
for
autophagic degeneration of cardiomyocytes during heart
failure [84,85]. because ubiquitinated smcs in the fibrous
cap are surrounded by a thick layer of basal lamina [79], it is
these “caged” cells undergo
tempting to speculate that
autophagy as a result of starvation effects. further evidence
for autophagy in atherosclerotic plaques comes from in vitro
studies. 7-ketocholesterol (7kc) is one of the major oxy-
sterols present
in atherosclerotic plaques. treatment of
smcs in culture with 7kc results in extensive vacuolization,
intense protein ubiquitination and processing of cytosolic
microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (lc3-i) into
the autophagosome specific isoform lc3-ii [83]. the latter
event has never been observed in apoptosis or necrosis but is
characteristic of autophagy. all
these findings
strongly suggest that autophagy occurs in human athero-
sclerotic plaques, particularly in smcs. however, the spe-
cific role and regulation of autophagy in atherosclerosis
remain to be determined. since autophagy is well recognized
as a survival mechanism and not as a death pathway [86],
one can speculate that autophagy of smcs in the fibrous cap
is an important mechanism underlying plaque stability.
together,
7. phagocytosis in atherosclerosis: beneficial or
detrimental?
given the complex role of macrophage phagocytosis in
atherosclerosis, it would be interesting to know whether a
general change in the rate of phagocytosis has a beneficial or
detrimental effect on plaque progression and whether the
ultimate effect of phagocytosis depends on the type and/or
complexity of the lesion. however, direct in vivo evidence
from studies using phagocytosis inhibitors such as cytocha-
lasin b or latrunculin a is lacking so that we can only
formulate preliminary conclusions based on indirect observa-
tions as outlined above. early lesions do not contain large
amounts of infiltrated platelets or erythrocytes and reveal
undetectable levels of apoptosis. therefore, phagocytosis in
d.m. schrijvers et al. / cardiovascular research 73 (2007) 470–480
477
seems beneficial for plaque stability. because phagocytosis
of ac by macrophages in advanced plaques is significantly
impaired (fig. 2), the benefit resulting from ac uptake would
not overrule the negative aspects associated with phagocy-
tosis of lipoproteins, platelets or erythrocytes, especially in
complicated lesions with significant neovascularization or in
plaques that have ruptured. as a consequence, both in early
and advanced lesions, phagocytosis may stimulate rather than
inhibit plaque formation. if true, nonspecific enhancement of
phagocytosis in atherosclerosis is not desirable. nonetheless,
apoptotic clearance is a beneficial process and selectively
enhancing ac uptake might help to prevent the progression
of advanced atherosclerotic lesions, on condition that the
proclearance intervention would not alter the fundamental
property of phagocytes to selectively recognize and ingest
only apoptotic cells. glucocorticoids are known to stimulate
phagocytic clearance of ac, but the serious adverse effects of
glucocorticoid therapy render this approach impractical [35].
examples of other pharmaceuticals that promote phagocytic
clearance of ac are the cholesterol-lowering agent lovastatin
[87], the macrolide antibiotic azithromycin [88] and members
of the lipoxin family [89]. future studies are needed to
determine whether these drugs may provide the basis for a
novel
the progression of
advanced atherosclerotic plaques via interference with the
process of phagocytosis. indeed, it has recently been pro-
posed that too much phagocytosis of ac might be associated
with the production of reactive oxygen species and tissue
injury which has prompted the search for attenuation mecha-
nisms of phagocytosis [90].
therapeutic strategy to prevent
8. conclusion
it is generally assumed that macrophages play a crucial
role in plaque destabilization and rupture. from this pers-
pective, selective removal of macrophages might be bene-
ficial for plaque stability. however, macrophages also have
an important role in scavenging of modified lipoproteins,
senescent cells and cells that have died by apoptosis. loss of
macrophages would therefore reduce scavenging activity
resulting in the accumulation of extracellular oxldl and
ac. unphagocytized oxldl is detrimental for the plaque
due to cytotoxic effects, but also the consequences of im-
paired phagocytosis of ac are likely to be substantial.
indeed, free ac promote (secondary) necrosis, inflammation
and thrombosis and may contribute to acute clinical com-
plications after plaque rupture. on the other hand, uptake of
erythrocytes and platelets leads to macrophage activation and
plaque instability. these findings suggest that macrophage
phagocytosis in atherogenesis might act as a double edged
sword. macrophages are necessary for removal of ac from
plaques, but exert strong proatherogenic properties upon
phagocytosis of lipoproteins, erythrocytes and platelets.
besides heterophagocytosis, evidence is emerging for the
initiation of autophagy in atherosclerosis. the paucity of
markers is the greatest limitation in studying autophagy in
fig. 4. smooth muscle cells (smcs) in advanced human atherosclerotic
plaques showing features that are typical of autophagy. a, transmission
electron microscopy of dying smcs in the fibrous cap surrounded by a
prominent cage of basal lamina (bl). these smcs completely disintegrate
into myriad vesicles evocative of autophagic vacuoles. b, high-power
photomicrograph of the boxed area in panel a showing small membrane-
bound vesicles of varying sizes in the cytoplasmic extensions of the
disintegrating smcs. c, low-power photomicrograph of a human
atherosclerotic plaque immunohistochemically stained for ubiquitin (red)
and α-smc actin (blue). smcs in the fibrous cap covering the plaque (pl)
but not smcs in the media (m) often contain granular ubiquitin inclusions in
their cytoplasm. cytoplasmic ubiquitin staining is currently an established
marker of autophagic cell death in disintegrating cardiomyocytes. d, high-
power image of the boxed area in c showing nuclear and cytoplasmic
ubiquitin staining in smcs of the plaque (arrows). e, high-power image of
medial smcs as present in the boxed area of c. bar = 3 μm (a), 100 μm (c)
or 10 μm (d–e).
early lesions is mainly focused on lipoproteins and might be
proatherogenic. in advanced lesions, where different particles
or cellular debris can be phagocytized including platelets,
erythrocytes, ac and lipoproteins, only phagocytosis of ac
478
d.m. schrijvers et al. / cardiovascular research 73 (2007) 470–480
mammalian tissue including atherosclerotic plaques. at
present, autophagy is linked to various human pathologies
such as alzheimer's disease, different forms of cancer,
muscular disorders and cardiomyopathies [91], resulting in
increased attention to this process. continued progress on the
detection methods and the proteins involved in the auto-
phagic process will undoubtedly provide more insight into
the role of autophagy in atherosclerosis.
acknowledgments
research was supported by the fund for scientific re-
search-flanders (grants g.0180.01 and g.0308.04), by the
university of antwerp (noi-bof) and by the bekales
foundation. w. martinet is a postdoctoral fellow of the fund
for scientific research-flanders. the authors wish to thank
m.m. kockx for providing electron microscopy images.
references
[1] williams kj, tabas i. the response-to-retention hypothesis of early
atherogenesis. arterioscler thromb vasc biol 1995;15:551–61.
[2] kolodgie fd, gold hk, burke ap, fowler dr, kruth hs, weber dk,
et al. intraplaque hemorrhage and progression of coronary atheroma.
n engl j med 2003;349:2316–25.
[3] aderem a, underhill dm. mechanisms of phagocytosis in macro-
phages. annu rev immunol 1999;17:593–623.
[4] crawford dw, blankenhorn dh. arterial wall oxygenation, oxyradi-
cals, and atherosclerosis. atherosclerosis 1991;89:97–108.
[5] wada y, sugiyama a, yamamoto t, naito m, noguchi n, yokoyama
s, et al. lipid accumulation in smooth muscle cells under ldl loading
is independent of ldl receptor pathway and enhanced by hypoxic
conditions. arterioscler thromb vasc biol 2002;22:1712–9.
[6] brown ms, goldstein jl. lipoprotein metabolism in the macrophage:
implications for cholesterol deposition in atherosclerosis. annu rev
biochem 1983;52:223–61.
[7] goldstein jl, ho yk, basu sk, brown ms. binding site on
macrophages that mediates uptake and degradation of acetylated low
density lipoprotein, producing massive cholesterol deposition. proc
natl acad sci u s a 1979;76:333–7.
[8] steinberg d, lewis a. conner memorial lecture. oxidative modifica-
tion of ldl and atherogenesis. circulation 1997;95:1062–71.
[9] khoo jc, miller e, mcloughlin p, steinberg d. enhanced macrophage
uptake of low density lipoprotein after self-aggregation. arterio-
sclerosis 1988;8:348–58.
[10] yuan xm, brunk ut, olsson ag. effects of iron- and hemoglobin-
loaded human monocyte-derived macrophages on oxidation and
uptake of ldl. arterioscler thromb vasc biol 1995;15:1345–51.
[11] aviram m, maor i, keidar s, hayek t, oiknine j, bar-el y, et al.
lesioned low density lipoprotein in atherosclerotic apolipoprotein e-
deficient transgenic mice and in humans is oxidized and aggregated.
biochem biophys res commun 1995;216:501–13.
[12] maor i, hayek t, hirsch m, iancu tc, aviram m. macrophage-
released proteoglycans enhance ldl aggregation: studies in aorta from
apolipoprotein e-deficient mice. atherosclerosis 2000;150:91–101.
[13] matsuura e, kobayashi k, inoue k, lopez lr, shoenfeld y. oxidized
ldl/beta2-glycoprotein i complexes: new aspects in atherosclerosis.
lupus 2005;14:736–41.
[14] schonbeck u, gerdes n, varo n, reynolds rs, horton db,
bavendiek u, et al. oxidized low-density lipoprotein augments and
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme a reductase inhibitors limit
cd40 and cd40l expression in human vascular cells. circulation
2002;106:2888–93.
[15] ramprasad mp, terpstra v, kondratenko n, quehenberger o,
steinberg d. cell surface expression of mouse macrosialin and
human cd68 and their role as macrophage receptors for oxidized low
density lipoprotein. proc natl acad sci u s a 1996;93:14833–8.
[16] kume n, murase t, moriwaki h, aoyama t, sawamura t, masaki t,
et al. inducible expression of lectin-like oxidized ldl receptor-1 in
vascular endothelial cells. circ res 1998;83:322–7.
[17] miller yi, viriyakosol s, binder cj, feramisco jr, kirkland tn,
witztum jl. minimally modified ldl binds to cd14,
induces
macrophage spreading via tlr4/md-2, and inhibits phagocytosis of
apoptotic cells. j biol chem 2003;278:1561–8.
[18] llorente-cortes v, badimon l. ldl receptor-related protein and the
vascular wall: implications for atherothrombosis. arterioscler thromb
vasc biol 2005;25:497–504.
[19] kruth hs. sequestration of aggregated low-density lipoproteins by
macrophages. curr opin lipidol 2002;13:483–8.
[20] jessup w, kritharides l. metabolism of oxidized ldl by macro-
phages. curr opin lipidol 2000;11:473–81.
[21] martinet w, kockx mm. apoptosis in atherosclerosis: focus on
oxidized lipids and inflammation. curr opin lipidol 2001;12:535–41.
[22] asmis r, begley jg, jelk j, everson wv. lipoprotein aggregation
protects human monocyte-derived macrophages from oxldl-induced
cytotoxicity. j lipid res 2005;46:1124–32.
[23] hansson gk. inflammation, atherosclerosis, and coronary artery
disease. n engl j med 2005;352:1685–95.
[24] moreau m, brocheriou i, petit l, ninio e, chapman mj, rouis m.
interleukin-8 mediates downregulation of tissue inhibitor of metallopro-
teinase-1 expression in cholesterol-loaded human macrophages: rele-
vance to stability of atherosclerotic plaque. circulation 1999;99:420–6.
[25] rajagopalan s, meng xp, ramasamy s, harrison dg, galis zs.
reactive oxygen species produced by macrophage-derived foam cells
regulate the activity of vascular matrix metalloproteinases in vitro.
implications for atherosclerotic plaque stability. j clin invest
1996;98:2572–9.
[26] fazio s, major as, swift ll, gleaves la, accad m, linton mf, et al.
increased atherosclerosis in ldl receptor-null mice lacking acat1 in
macrophages. j clin invest 2001;107:163–71.
[27] nissen se, tuzcu m, brewer b, sipahi i, nicholls sj, ganz p, et al.
effect of acat inhibition on the progression of coronary atheroscle-
rosis. n engl j med 2006;354:1253–63.
[28] fazio s, macrae fl. failure of acat inhibition to retard atherosclerosis.
n engl j med 2006;354:1307–9.
[29] bjorkerud s, bjorkerud b. apoptosis is abundant
in human
atherosclerotic lesions, especially in inflammatory cells (macrophages
and t cells), and may contribute to the accumulation of gruel and
plaque instability. am j pathol 1996;149:367–80.
[30] tabas i. consequences and therapeutic implications of macrophage
apoptosis in atherosclerosis:
the importance of lesion stage and
phagocytic efficiency. arterioscler thromb vasc biol 2005;25:2255–64.
[31] fadok va, bratton dl, konowal a, freed pw, westcott jy, henson
pm. macrophages that have ingested apoptotic cells in vitro inhibit
proinflammatory cytokine production through autocrine/paracrine me-
chanisms involving tgf-beta, pge2, and paf. j clin invest 1998;101:
890–8.
[32] savill j, fadok v. corpse clearance defines the meaning of cell death.
nature 2000;407:784–8.
[33] grainger dj, reckless j, mckilligin e. apolipoprotein e modulates
clearance of apoptotic bodies in vitro and in vivo, resulting in a
systemic proinflammatory state in apolipoprotein e-deficient mice.
j immunol 2004;173:6366–75.
[34] chung ey, kim sj, ma xj. regulation of cytokine production during
phagocytosis of apoptotic cells. cell res 2006;16:154–61.
[35] maderna p, godson c. phagocytosis of apoptotic cells and the resol-
ution of inflammation. biochim biophys acta 2003;1639:141–51.
[36] decathelineau am, henson pm. the final step in programmed cell
death: phagocytes carry apoptotic cells to the grave. essays biochem
2003;39:105–17.
d.m. schrijvers et al. / cardiovascular research 73 (2007) 470–480
479
[37] fadok va, henson pm. apoptosis: getting rid of the bodies. curr biol
1998;8:r693–5.
[38] ravichandran ks. “recruitment signals” from apoptotic cells: invi-
tation to a quiet meal. cell 2003;113:817–20.
[39] callahan mk, williamson p, schlegel ra. surface expression of
phosphatidylserine on macrophages is required for phagocytosis of
apoptotic thymocytes. cell death differ 2000;7:645–53.
[40] denecker g, dooms h, van loo g, vercammen d, grooten j, fiers w,
et al. phosphatidyl serine exposure during apoptosis precedes release
of cytochrome c and decrease in mitochondrial
transmembrane
potential. febs lett 2000;465:47–52.
[41] hoffmann pr, decathelineau am, ogden ca, leverrier y, bratton
dl, daleke dl, et al. phosphatidylserine (ps) induces ps receptor-
mediated macropinocytosis and promotes clearance of apoptotic cells.
j cell biol 2001;155:649–59.
[42] krahling s, callahan mk, williamson p, schlegel ra. exposure of
phosphatidylserine is a general feature in the phagocytosis of apoptotic
lymphocytes by macrophages. cell death differ 1999;6:183–9.
[43] fadok va, bratton dl, rose dm, pearson a, ezekewitz ra, henson
pm. a receptor for phosphatidylserine-specific clearance of apoptotic
cells. nature 2000;405:85–90.
[44] li mo, sarkisian mr, mehal wz, rakic p, flavell ra. phosphati-
dylserine receptor is required for clearance of apoptotic cells. science
2003;302:1560–3.
[45] pradhan d, krahling s, williamson p, schlegel ra. multiple systems
for recognition of apoptotic lymphocytes by macrophages. mol biol
cell 1997;8:767–78.
[46] chang mk, bergmark c, laurila a, horkko s, han kh, friedman p,
et al. monoclonal antibodies against oxidized low-density lipoprotein
bind to apoptotic cells and inhibit their phagocytosis by elicited mac-
rophages: evidence that oxidation-specific epitopes mediate macro-
phage recognition. proc natl acad sci u s a 1999;96:6353–8.
[47] sambrano gr, terpstra v, steinberg d. independent mechanisms for
macrophage binding and macrophage phagocytosis of damaged
erythrocytes. evidence of receptor cooperativity. arterioscler thromb
vasc biol 1997;17:3442–8.
[48] palinski w, tangirala rk, miller e, young sg, witztum jl. increased
autoantibody titers against epitopes of oxidized ldl in ldl receptor-
deficient mice with increased atherosclerosis. arterioscler thromb
vasc biol 1995;15:1569–76.
[49] shaw px, horkko s, tsimikas s, chang mk, palinski w, silverman
gj, et al. human-derived anti-oxidized ldl autoantibody blocks
uptake of oxidized ldl by macrophages and localizes to athero-
sclerotic lesions in vivo. arterioscler thromb vasc biol 2001;21:
1333–9.
[50] schrijvers dm, de meyer gry, kockx mm, herman ag, martinet w.
phagocytosis of apoptotic cells by macrophages is impaired in athe-
rosclerosis. arterioscler thromb vasc biol 2005;25:1256–61.
[51] moller w, hofer t, ziesenis a, karg e, heyder j. ultrafine particles
cause cytoskeletal dysfunctions in macrophages. toxicol appl pharma-
col 2002;182:197–207.
[52] arai s, shelton jm, chen m, bradley mn, castrillo a, bookout al,
et al. a role for the apoptosis inhibitory factor aim/spalpha/api6 in
atherosclerosis development. cell metab 2005;1:201–13.
[53] hanayama r, tanaka m, miwa k, shinohara a, iwamatsu a, nagata
s. identification of a factor that links apoptotic cells to phagocytes.
nature 2002;417:182–7.
[54] su yr, dove de, major as, hasty ah, boone b, linton mf, et al.
reduced abca1-mediated cholesterol efflux and accelerated athero-
sclerosis in apolipoprotein e-deficient mice lacking macrophage-
derived acat1. circulation 2005;111:2373–81.
[55] wiegand uk, corbach s, prescott ar, savill j, spruce ba. the trigger
to cell death determines the efficiency with which dying cells are
cleared by neighbours. cell death differ 2001;8:734–46.
[56] kadl a, bochkov vn, huber j, leitinger n. apoptotic cells as sources
for biologically active oxidized phospholipids. antioxid redox signal
2004;6:311–20.
[57] mallat z, hugel b, ohan j, leseche g, freyssinet jm, tedgui a. shed
membrane microparticles with procoagulant potential in human athe-
rosclerotic plaques: a role for apoptosis in plaque thrombogenicity.
circulation 1999;99:348–53.
[58] casciola-rosen l, rosen a, petri m, schlissel m. surface blebs on
apoptotic cells are sites of enhanced procoagulant activity: implications
for coagulation events and antigenic spread in systemic lupus erythe-
matosus. proc natl acad sci u s a 1996;93:1624–9.
[59] tedgui a, mallat z. apoptosis as a determinant of atherothrombosis.
thromb haemost 2001;86:420–6.
[60] roos a, xu w, castellano g, nauta aj, garred p, daha mr, et al.
a pivotal role for innate immunity in the clearance of apoptotic
cells. eur j immunol 2004;34:921–9.
[61] boisvert wa, rose dm, boullier a, quehenberger o, sydlaske a,
johnson ka, et al. leukocyte transglutaminase 2 expression limits
atherosclerotic lesion size. arterioscler thromb vasc biol 2006;26:
563–9.
[62] szondy z, sarang z, molnar p, nemeth t, piacentini m, mastrober-
ardino pg, et al. transglutaminase 2−/− mice reveal a phagocytosis-
associated crosstalk between macrophages and apoptotic cells. proc
natl acad sci u s a 2003;100:7812–7.
[63] aprahamian t, rifkin i, bonegio r, hugel b, freyssinet jm, sato k,
et al. impaired clearance of apoptotic cells promotes synergy between
atherogenesis and autoimmune disease. j exp med 2004;199:1121–31.
[64] jeziorska m, wooley de. local neovascularization and cellular com-
position within vulnerable regions of atherosclerotic plaques of human
carotid arteries. j pathol 1999;188:189–96.
[65] kaartinen m, penttila a, kovanen pt. mast cells accompany mic-
rovessels in human coronary atheromas:
implications for intimal
neovascularization and hemorrhage. atherosclerosis 1996;123:123–31.
[66] sambrano gr, parthasarathy s, steinberg d. recognition of oxi-
datively damaged erythrocytes by a macrophage receptor with speci-
ficity for oxidized low density lipoprotein. proc natl acad sci u s a
1994;91:3265–9.
[67] kockx mm, cromheeke km, knaapen mw, bosmans jm, de meyer
gry, herman ag, et al. phagocytosis and macrophage activation
associated with hemorrhagic microvessels in human atherosclerosis.
arterioscler thromb vasc biol 2003;23:440–6.
[68] loegering dj, raley mj, reho ta, eaton jw. macrophage
dysfunction following the phagocytosis of igg-coated erythrocytes:
production of lipid peroxidation products. j leukoc biol 1996;59:
357–62.
[69] raley mj, loegering dj. role of an oxidative stress in the macrophage
dysfunction caused by erythrophagocytosis. free radic biol med
1999;27:1455–64.
[70] yuan xm, anders wl, olsson ag, brunk ut. iron in human athe-
roma and ldl oxidation by macrophages following erythrophagocy-
tosis. atherosclerosis 1996;124:61–73.
[71] lee fy, lee ts, pan cc, huang al, chau ly. colocalization of iron and
ceroid in human atherosclerotic lesions. atherosclerosis 1998;138: 281–8.
[72] tedgui a, mallat z. platelets in atherosclerosis: a new role for beta-
amyloid peptide beyond alzheimer's disease. circ res 2002;90:1145–6.
[73] curtiss lk, dyer ca, banka cl, black as. platelet-mediated foam
cell formation in atherosclerosis. clin invest med 1990;13:189–95.
[74] de meyer y, de cleen dm, cooper s, knaapen mw, jans dm,
martinet w, et al. platelet phagocytosis and processing of beta-amyloid
precursor protein as a mechanism of macrophage activation in athe-
rosclerosis. circ res 2002;90:1197–204.
[75] jans dm, martinet w, van de parre tjl, herman ag, bult h,
kockx mm, et al. processing of amyloid precursor protein as a
biochemical link between atherosclerosis and alzheimer's disease.
cardiovasc haematol disord drug targets 2006;6:21–34.
[76] gozuacik d, kimchi a. autophagy as a cell death and tumor sup-
pressor mechanism. oncogene 2004;23:2891–906.
[77] martinet w, de meyer gry, andries l, herman ag, kockx mm.
detection of autophagy in tissue by standard immunohistochemistry —
possibilities and limitations. autophagy 2006;2:55–7.
480
d.m. schrijvers et al. / cardiovascular research 73 (2007) 470–480
[78] kockx mm, de meyer gry, buyssens n, knaapen mw, bult h,
herman ag. cell composition, replication, and apoptosis in atheros-
clerotic plaques after 6 months of cholesterol withdrawal. circ res
1998;83:378–87.
[79] kockx mm, de meyer gry, muhring j, jacob w, bult h, herman
ag. apoptosis and related proteins in different stages of human athe-
rosclerotic plaques. circulation 1998;97:2307–15.
[80] stehbens we. cerebral atherosclerosis. intimal proliferation and
atherosclerosis in the cerebral arteries. arch pathol 1975;99:582–91.
[81] kockx mm, herman ag. apoptosis in atherosclerosis: beneficial or
detrimental? cardiovasc res 2000;45:736–46.
[82] kockx mm, de meyer gry, bortier h, de meyere n, muhring j,
bakker a, et al. luminal foam cell accumulation is associated with
smooth muscle cell death in the intimal thickening of human saphe-
nous vein grafts. circulation 1996;94:1255–62.
[83] martinet w, de bie m, schrijvers dm, de meyer gry, herman ag,
kockx mm. 7-ketocholesterol induces protein ubiquitination, myelin
figure formation, and light chain 3 processing in vascular smooth
muscle cells. arterioscler thromb vasc biol 2004;24:2296–301.
[84] knaapen mw, davies mj, de bie m, haven aj, martinet w, kockx
mm. apoptotic versus autophagic cell death in heart failure. cardiovasc
res 2001;51:304–12.
[85] kostin s, pool l, elsasser a, et al. myocytes die by multiple mecha-
nisms in failing human hearts. circ res 2003;92:715–24.
[86] baehrecke eh. autophagy: dual roles in life and death? nat rev mol
cell biol 2005;6:505–10.
[87] morimoto k, janssen wj, fessler mb, mcphillips ka, borges vm,
bowler rp, et al. lovastatin enhances clearance of apoptotic cells
(efferocytosis) with implications for chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. j immunol 2006;176:7657–65.
[88] hodge s, hodge g, brozyna s, jersmann h, holmes m, reynolds pn.
azithromycin increases phagocytosis of apoptotic bronchial epithelial
cells by alveolar macrophages. eur respir j; in press.
[89] godson c, mitchell s, harvey k, petasis na, hogg n, brady hr.
cutting edge: lipoxins rapidly stimulate nonphlogistic phagocytosis of
apoptotic neutrophils by monocyte-derived macrophages. j immunol
2000;164:1663–7.
[90] de almeida cj, linden r. phagocytosis of apoptotic cells: a matter of
balance. cell mol life sci 2005;62:1532–46.
[91] cuervo am. autophagy: in sickness and in health. trends cell biol
2004;14:70–7.