leading edge
minireview
autophagy: paying charon’s toll
tamotsu yoshimori1,2,*
1department of cell regulation, research institute for microbial diseases, osaka university, 3-1 yamadaoka, suita-osaka 565-
0871, japan
2crest, japan science and technology agency, kawaguchi-saitama 332-0012, japan
*correspondence: tamyoshi@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp
doi 10.1016/j.cell.2007.02.023
autophagy (literally self-eating) has diverse cytoprotective functions but also is linked 
to  programmed  cell  death  (pcd).  in  this  issue,  qu  et  al.  (2007)  analyze  the  role  of 
autophagy in pcd during development. unexpectedly they find that autophagy induces 
apoptotic cells to present a signal to ensure their clearance, which is crucial for mouse 
embryonic morphogenesis.
macroautophagy  (herein  referred  to  as  autophagy)  is 
a  unique  form  of  membrane  trafficking  in  which  mem-
brane  compartments  (autophagosomes)  engulf  both 
organelles  and  cytosolic  macromolecules  and  deliver 
them to the lysosome/vacuole for degradation (reviewed 
in  mizushima,  2005).  although  electron  microscopists 
first recognized the process in animal tissues in the early 
1960s, it took 30 years to decipher the molecular com-
ponents  of  this  curious  phenomenon.  groundbreaking 
studies in yeast have identified over 20 autophagy-related 
(atg) genes and have shed light on the molecular com-
ponents of autophagy (reviewed in yorimitsu and klion-
sky, 2005). in yeast, the primary function of autophagy 
is to maintain viability during times of starvation. many 
of  the  atg  genes  are  conserved  in  metazoans  includ-
ing mammals, and extensive studies during the last ten 
years have unexpectedly revealed a pleiotropic role for 
autophagy in the protection and maintenance of cellu-
lar life as well as in response to starvation (mizushima, 
2005). on the other hand, a large body of evidence indi-
cates  a  link  between  autophagy  and  programmed  cell 
death (pcd) (reviewed in levine and yuan, 2005). this 
minireview will briefly summarize our current knowledge 
about  the  role  of  autophagy  in  animals  in  cellular  life 
and death and will introduce a new function: to provide 
apoptotic  cells  with  a  signal  to  ensure  their  clearance 
in morphogenesis during development (qu et al., 2007). 
this function is reminiscent of a story in greek mythol-
ogy where a coin is placed in the mouth or hand of the 
dead to pay charon for ferrying the spirit across the river 
styx to the elysian fields.
autophagy, a cellular guardian
in mammals, severe starvation at birth, due to loss of the 
placental nutrient supply, induces autophagy in various 
neonatal tissues, such as heart, lung, and pancreas. in 
the absence of atg5, which is required for autophago-
some  formation,  mice  do  not  survive  neonatal  starva-
tion  and  die  within  a  day  after  birth,  suggesting  that 
autophagy is essential to overcome starvation (kuma et 
al., 2004). in vitro, starvation usually induces apoptosis 
low 
in normal mammalian cells. however, cells that respond 
to  il3—an  interleukin  that  directs  the  uptake  of  extra-
cellular nutrients into cells—and lack the apoptotic pro-
teins bax and bak can survive even for several weeks in 
the absence of il3. autophagy is indispensable for this 
long period of survival because small interfering (si)rna 
against atg7 decreased the viability of these cells (lum 
et al., 2005). how does autophagy antagonize nutrient 
starvation?  perhaps,  the  products  of  self-degradation 
in lysosomes, such as amino acids, support the tricar-
boxylic acid (tca) cycle to generate atp necessary for 
maintaining cell viability.
animal  cells  exhibit 
levels  of  constitutive 
autophagy even under normal dietary conditions. what 
is  the  role  of  this  basal  autophagy?  two  independent 
studies  using  conditional  knockout  mice  whose  brains 
lacked  atg5  and  atg7,  respectively,  demonstrated  that 
absence of this basal autophagy in brain tissue caused 
neurodegenerative  disease  (hara  et  al.,  2006;  kom-
atsu et al., 2006). although these mice are not geneti-
cally prone to the disease, cytoplasmic inclusion bodies 
accumulated  in  their  neurons.  thus,  basal  autophagy 
is probably critical for clearance of spontaneously and 
constitutively  generated  misfolded  proteins.  further-
more,  accumulating  evidence  strongly  suggests  that 
both  autophagy  and  the  proteasome  defend  neurons 
against aggregate-prone toxic mutant proteins (such as 
expanded polyglutamine-containing proteins) that cause 
neurodegenerative  disease.  in  this  case,  autophagy 
seems to selectively degrade abnormal proteins in con-
trast to basal and starvation-induced autophagy, which 
is  thought  to  be  nonselective.  this  function  is  not  lim-
ited to nerve cells—the α1-antitrypsin z mutant protein, 
which  accumulates  in  the  endoplasmic  reticulum  (er) 
of liver cells and causes liver degeneration, is targeted 
by autophagosomes. in atg5-deficient cells, this mutant 
protein  was  not  degraded  efficiently  and  accumulated 
in large inclusion bodies that were observed at a lower 
frequency in wild-type cells (kamimoto et al., 2006).
the function of autophagy in animals extends beyond 
the  original  definition  of  this  process,  self-eating.  the 
cell 128, march 9, 2007 ©2007 elsevier inc.  833
autophagic  machinery  is  applied  to  cellular  defense 
against  invasive  pathogens,  which  are,  of  course,  not 
intrinsic  components  of  cells.  for  example,  group  a 
streptococcus enters host cells via the endocytic path-
way  and  escapes  from  endosomes  into  the  cytoplasm 
to  avoid  lysosomal  degradation.  however,  appearance 
of  the  bacteria  in  the  cytoplasm  triggers  specialized 
autophagy,  which  selectively  sequesters  and  kills  the 
bacteria (nakagawa et al., 2004). some pathogens have 
acquired  the  ability  to  circumvent  or  hijack  autophagy 
to  survive  within  cells.  autophagy  against  unwelcome 
guests such as pathogens is another example of selec-
tive autophagy. therefore, autophagy may have evolved 
in  higher  eukaryotes  as  an  active  defense  system.  in 
addition  to  innate  immunity,  autophagy  also  partici-
pates  in  adaptive  immunity.  some  cytosolic  antigens 
are sequestered and degraded by autophagy and then 
processed for presentation on mhc class ii molecules 
(reviewed in mizushima, 2005). also, autophagic elimi-
nation of superfluous organelles including peroxisomes, 
mitochondoria, and the er maintains cellular homeosta-
sis. developmental and anti-aging functions have been 
also suggested for autophagy (mizushima, 2005).
autophagy as pluto
autophagy  is  a  remarkable  feature  of  certain  forms  of 
nonapoptotic  pcd  termed  autophagic  cell  death  or 
type  ii  cell  death  (levine  and  yuan,  2005).  the  term 
autophagic cell death may have misled people into think-
ing that autophagy triggers pcd. the term merely rep-
resents the fact that a large number of autophagosomes 
are observed in dying cells. is autophagy responsible for 
cell death or is it induced to resist ongoing death? or is 
autophagy merely a scavenger that clears cellular con-
tent prior to death to relieve phagocytes?
pharmacological  approaches  in  several  in  vitro  sys-
tems  have  advocated  that  autophagy  executes  pcd. 
however, 3-methyladenine (3-ma), the autophagy inhib-
itor used in these experiments, inhibits not only class iii 
pi3-kinase—which is essential in autophagosome forma-
tion—but also other classes of pi3-kinases and has side 
effects at the higher concentrations used for autophagy 
inhibition (levine and yuan, 2005). given that a specific 
inhibitor  of  autophagy  does  not  exist,  genetic  strate-
gies such as loss of functions are the best approach to 
analyze the involvement of autophagy in pcd. the first 
experiment demonstrating the involvement of autophagy 
in  cell  death  was  performed  in  mouse  l929  fibroblas-
tic cells treated with zvad, a caspase 8 inhibitor, which 
induces  nonapoptotic  death  in  this  cell  line  (yu  et  al., 
2004). rnai-mediated knockdown of atg7 or beclin-1—
a mammalian homolog of vps30/atg6 that is a compo-
nent of class iii pi3-kinase—reduced cell death induced 
by zvad in these cells. treatment with zvad also caused 
selective  autophagic  degradation  of  catalase,  which 
resulted in the accumulation of reactive oxygen species 
leading to cell death (yu et al., 2006). a remaining ques-
tion is how catalase is recognized and why autophagy 
834  cell 128, march 9, 2007 ©2007 elsevier inc.
does  not  target  this  enzyme  under  normal  conditions. 
furthermore,  cell  death  induced  by  chemicals  such 
as  etoposide  occurred  via  autophagy  in  cells  deficient 
for apoptotic proteins bax and bak. this death did not 
occur  when  atg5  and  beclin-1  were  silenced  (shimizu 
et  al.,  2004).  it  was  reported  recently  that  autophagy 
acts upstream of apoptosis in death signaling induced 
by hiv envelope glycoproteins in uninfected bystander 
cd4 t lymphocytes because rnai of beclin-1 and atg7 
inhibited the apoptotic process (espert et al., 2006). the 
results  suggest  that  autophagy  can  trigger  cell  death 
under specific conditions.
meanwhile,  there  is  evidence  suggesting  that  atg5 
is  a  bifunctional  molecule  involved  in  both  autophagy 
and pcd. atg5 was shown to play a crucial role in ifn-
γ-induced  cell  death  in  hela  cells  through  interaction 
with fas-associated protein with death domain (fadd). 
however, rnai of fadd inhibited the atg5-mediated cell 
death but did not inhibit formation of autophagosomes 
(pyo  et  al.,  2005).  thus,  not  autophagy  itself  but  atg5 
plays  a  role  in  the  signaling.  it  was  also  demonstrated 
that  various  apoptotic  stimuli  caused  calpain-medi-
ated  cleavage  of  atg5.  this  truncated  product  bound 
to  antiapoptotic  protein  bcl-xl  in  mitochondoria  and 
triggered  apoptosis  (yousefi  et  al.,  2006).  again,  atg5 
functioned as a pro-death factor independent of its role 
in autophagy.
excessive  nonselective  autophagy  may  cause  cell 
death  by  degrading  cellular  components  essential  for 
cell viability or by degrading inhibitors of pcd, such as 
antiapoptotic factors. indeed, two studies support this 
possibility. beclin-1 was originally identified as a protein 
binding to antiapoptotic bcl-2 protein, and bcl-2 nega-
tively  regulates  autophagy  by  binding  to  beclin-1  (pat-
tingre  et  al.,  2005).  intriguingly,  expression  of  beclin-1 
mutants that cannot bind to bcl-2 induced a higher level 
of  autophagy  than  the  level  observed  under  starvation 
even  under  nutrient-rich  conditions  (pattingre  et  al., 
2005).  this  mutant  also  simultaneously  promoted  cell 
death. a high level of autophagy also could be achieved 
in fly tissues by overexpression of atg1, a ser-thr kinase 
that regulates autophagy, and this led to apoptotic cell 
death (scott et al., 2007). in both cases, cell death was 
blocked by atg5 rnai or in an atg8a mutant background, 
respectively, which means that these forms of cell death 
were probably due to higher levels of autophagy itself, 
and not simply to beclin-1 or atg1.
taken together, it is clear that autophagy can trigger 
cell death in certain contexts including inhibition of apop-
tosis, viral protein expression, and the presence of high 
levels of autophagy. in addition, atg5 may link autophagy 
to pcd. the situation in vivo is still unclear. autophagy 
might contribute to immunodeficiency in an hiv-infected 
animal.  in  normal  animals,  does  cell  death  induced  by 
autophagy  have  any  physiological  significance?  when 
autophagy  functions  as  a  cytoprotective  mechanism, 
how do cells control its levels? currently the connection 
between cell death and autophagy remains cryptic.
figure 1. the many functions of autophagy
autophagy has many protective roles but may also be involved in programmed cell death. qu et al. (2007) now show that autophagy, through the 
production of atp, is important for presenting a signal (phosphatidylserine) on an apoptotic cell to ensure its clearance. this appears to be important 
in morphogenesis during early mouse embryonic development.
autophagy pays charon’s toll
autophagy  is  prominent  in  pcd  during  developmental 
processes  such  as  lumen  formation  in  some  organs. 
however, as discussed above, if autophagy contributes 
to this pcd, it could do so in a variety of ways. to under-
stand  the  role  of  autophagy  in  pcd  associated  with 
morphogenesis, qu et al. (2007) used an in vitro system 
that  mimics  the  formation  of  the  proamniotic  cavity  in 
the  early  mouse  embryo.  embryonic  cavitation  can  be 
recapitulated  in  vitro  in  embryoid  bodies  (ebs)  formed 
by  culturing  mouse  embryonic  stem  (es)  cells  in  the 
absence  of  feeder  cells  and  leukemia-inhibitory  factor. 
ebs are cell aggregates consisting of an outer endoder-
mal cell layer and an inner ectodermal cell core. during 
cavitation,  inner  cells  die  by  apoptosis,  and  neighbor-
ing cells remove the dead cells by phagocytosis to form 
a  cavity.  inner  ectodermal  cells  in  ebs  from  knockout 
mice lacking beclin-1 or atg5 underwent apoptosis nor-
mally but could not be eliminated because they were not 
engulfed by neighboring cells. it is known that phagocy-
tosis of apoptotic cells depends on signals from these 
cells  including  exposure  of  phosphatidylserine  on  the 
cell  surface  and  secretion  of  lysophosphatidylcholine. 
beclin-1-  or  atg5-deficient  inner  ectodermal  cells  in 
ebs  failed  to  produce  these  signals  efficiently.  thus, 
autophagy  is  dispensable  for  apoptosis  during  embry-
onic cavitation but essential for presentation of the sig-
nal by apoptotic cells, which is crucial for their clearance 
to form the embryonic cavity.
qu  et  al.  further  demonstrated  that  atp  levels  were 
significantly  lower  in  es  cells  lacking  autophagic  abil-
ity.  addition  of  methylpyruvate—a  cell-permeable  form 
of pyruvate serving as a substrate for the tca cycle— 
rescued  the  defect  in  generating  the  signal  and  thus 
restored the clearance of apoptotic cells. together with 
the observation that autophagy is induced in inner ecto-
dermal  cells  during  eb  development,  they  concluded 
that  autophagy  induced  in  cells  undergoing  apoptosis 
produced atp to generate the signal for being engulfed. 
finally, they showed an increase in the number of apop-
totic cells and a decrease in the number of engulfed cells 
in the retina and lung of atg5 knockout mice embryos, 
suggesting that autophagy helps clear apoptotic cells in 
vivo as well.
a  new  item  is  now  added  to  the  growing  list  of  the 
functions of autophagy, which is neither cytoprotective 
nor pro-cell death but contributes to development (fig-
ure 1). this exciting finding brings up a number of issues. 
why  is  autophagy  required  for  atp  generation  in  ebs 
despite  cavitation  in  nutrient-rich  conditions?  perhaps 
this  is  due  to  the  lack  of  signal  transduction  pathways 
essential for nutrient uptake in the inner cells. interest-
ingly,  autophagy  was  not  required  for  phosphatidyl-
serine  exposure  in  single  es  cell  cultures  treated  with 
apoptosis inducers such as etoposide (qu et al., 2007). 
thus,  the  regulation  of  phosphatidylserine  exposure  in 
es cells changes in the three-dimensional architecture 
of cells and/or during development. the atp-dependent 
mechanism for phosphatidylserine exposure in ebs is an 
enigma.  in  the  final  stage  of  erythropoiesis,  nuclei  are 
expelled from erythroid precursor cells and engulfed by 
macrophages.  the  released  nuclei  expose  phosphati-
dylserine  to  be  engulfed  (yoshida  et  al.,  2005).  phos-
phatidylserine is normally confined to the inner leaflet of 
the plasma membrane by action of an atp-dependent 
aminophospholipid translocase that translocates phos-
phatidylserine from the outer leaflet to the inner leaflet. 
as the expelled nuclei contains an undetectable level of 
atp and a higher level of ca2+, it has been hypothesized 
that the aminophospholipid translocase becomes inac-
tive, while the activated ca2+-dependent scramblase ran-
domizes lipids across the bilayer. this causes a shift in 
the lipid composition of the membrane with more phos-
phatidylserine in the outer leaflet (yoshida et al., 2005). 
thus, in contrast with qu et al., lower levels of atp cor-
respond with phosphatidylserine exposure. future work 
should  reconcile  these  discrepancies  and  clarify  the 
mechanisms of autophagy-dependent surface exposure 
of  phosphatidylserine  in  ebs.  discrepancy  also  exists 
between  phenotypes  of  beclin-1  knockout  mouse  and 
cell 128, march 9, 2007 ©2007 elsevier inc.  835
atg5 knockout mouse. the former, but not the latter, fails 
to form proamniotic cavities, consistent with the results 
obtained in vitro. beclin-1 knockout mice are embryonic 
lethal, whereas atg5 knockout mice are born without vis-
ible abnormality (kuma et al., 2004). one possible expla-
nation is that unknown factors compensate in embryos 
for  the  lack  of  atg5  but  not  for  the  lack  of  beclin-1. 
however, atg5 knockout mouse neonates show severe 
defects  in  autophagy.  alternatively,  beclin-1  may  have 
an additional function other than autophagy. in fact, its 
yeast homolog vps30/atg6 functions in both autophagy 
and membrane trafficking to the vacuole (yorimitsu and 
klionsky, 2005).
although  atg5  knockout  mice  did  not  exhibit  severe 
developmental defects, the clearance of apoptotic cells 
seemed to be impaired and an increase in the number 
of  inflammatory  cells  including  lymphocytes  in  the  tis-
sues was observed (qu et al., 2007). thus, insufficient 
removal of apoptotic cells causes unwanted inflamma-
tory responses indicating that this clearance function is 
crucial not only for development but also tissue homeos-
tasis in adult animals. interestingly, a variant of atg16l1, 
an atg5-binding protein, is associated with crohn’s dis-
ease (hampe et al., 2007). crohn’s disease is a chronic 
inflammatory  disease  of  the  intestine,  the  cause  of 
which  is  unknown.  given  that  physiological  regenera-
tion  of  colonic  epithelium  is  accompanied  by  cell  loss 
due to shedding or apoptosis, the effective clearance of 
apoptotic cells, which may involve autophagy, might be 
important to prevent inflammation.
future directions
in the dreamlike novel hard-boiled wonderland and the 
end of the world, the author, haruki murakami, describes 
a man whose consciousness exists in two distinct paral-
lel worlds. murakami asks readers what consciousness 
is and what reality is. like the protagonist in this book, 
scientists working on autophagy seem to be wandering 
between  two  worlds:  in  one  autophagy  kills  cells  and 
in  the  other  it  sustains  cells.  qu  et  al.  now  add  a  new 
dimension to this paradox by reporting that autophagy is 
required for apoptotic cells to express the correct signal 
so that they are cleared appropriately.
although our knowledge of autophagy is growing day 
by day, we need more insights into the regulation and 
molecular  machinery  of  autophagy  to  further  under-
stand  its  importance  in  diverse  cellular  processes. 
although over 20 atg proteins have been identified, how 
they function and are regulated is still largely unknown. 
formation of autophagosomes stands apart from vesi-
cle  formation  in  other  membrane  traffic.  in  endocytic 
and secretory pathways, transport vesicles are formed 
by  budding  from  the  large  flat  membrane  of  donor 
organelles.  in  contrast,  autophagosomes  are  formed 
de  novo  in  the  cytoplasm  so  that  it  requires  unique 
mechanisms  other  than  those  used  in  the  canonical 
836  cell 128, march 9, 2007 ©2007 elsevier inc.
membrane traffic. no one knows how autophagosome 
formation  initiates  and  how  the  membrane  elongates 
and makes a curve autonomously. we need to further 
explore the heart of the autophagic wonderland.
references
espert,  l.,  denizot,  m.,  grimaldi,  m.,  robert-hebmann,  v.,  gay,  b., 
varbanov, m., codogno, p., and biard-piechaczyk, m. (2006). j. clin. 
invest. 116, 2161–2172.
hampe,  j.,  franke,  a.,  rosenstiel,  p.,  till,  a.,  teuber,  m.,  huse,  k., 
albrecht, m., mayr, g., de la vega, f.m., briggs, j., et al. (2007). nat. 
genet. 39, 207–211.
hara, t., nakamura, k., matsui, m., yamamoto, a., nakahara, y., su-
zuki-migishima, r., yokoyama, m., mishima, k., saito, i., okano, h., 
and mizushima, n. (2006). nature 441, 885–889.
kamimoto, t., shoji, s., hidvegi, t., mizushima, n., umebayashi, k., 
perlmutter, d.h., and yoshimori, t. (2006). j. biol. chem. 281, 4467–
4476.
komatsu,  m.,  waguri,  s.,  chiba,  t.,  murata,  s.,  iwata,  j.,  tanida, 
i., ueno, t., koike, m., uchiyama, y., kominami, e., and tanaka, k. 
(2006). nature 441, 880–884.
kuma, a., hatano, m., matsui, m., yamamoto, a., nakaya, h., yoshi-
mori, t., ohsumi, y., tokuhisa, t., and mizushima, n. (2004). nature 
432, 1032–1036.
levine, b., and yuan, j. (2005). j. clin. invest. 115, 2679–2688.
lum, j.j., bauer, d.e., kong, m., harris, m.h., li, c., lindsten, t., and 
thompson, c.b. (2005). cell 120, 237–248.
mizushima, n. (2005). cell death differ. 12 (suppl 2), 1535–1541.
nakagawa, i., amano, a., mizushima, n., yamamoto, a., yamaguchi, 
h.,  kamimoto,  t.,  nara,  a.,  funao,  j.,  nakata,  m.,  tsuda,  k.,  et  al. 
(2004). science 306, 1037–1040.
pattingre, s., tassa, a., qu, x., garuti, r., liang, x.h., mizushima, n., 
packer,  m.,  schneider,  m.d.,  and  levine,  b.  (2005).  cell  122,  927–
939.
pyo, j.o., jang, m.h., kwon, y.k., lee, h.j., jun, j.i., woo, h.n., cho, 
d.h.,  choi,  b.,  lee,  h.,  kim,  j.h.,  et  al.  (2005).  j.  biol.  chem. 280, 
20722–20729.
qu, x., zou, z., sun, q., luby-phelps, k., cheng, p., hogan, r., gilpin, 
c., and levine, b. (2007). cell, this issue.
scott, r.c., juhasz, g., and neufeld, t.p. (2007). curr. biol. 17, 1–11.
shimizu,  s.,  kanaseki,  t.,  mizushima,  n.,  mizuta,  t.,  arakawa-ko-
bayashi, s., thompson, c.b., and tsujimoto, y. (2004). nat. cell biol. 
6, 1221–1228.
yorimitsu,  t.,  and  klionsky,  d.j.  (2005).  cell  death  differ.  12  (suppl 
2), 1542–1552.
yoshida, h., kawane, k., koike, m., mori, y., uchiyama, y., and na-
gata, s. (2005). nature 437, 754–758.
yousefi,  s.,  perozzo,  r.,  schmid,  i.,  ziemiecki,  a.,  schaffner,  t., 
scapozza, l., brunner, t., and simon, h.u. (2006). nat. cell biol. 8, 
1124–1132.
yu,  l.,  alva,  a.,  su,  h.,  dutt,  p.,  freundt,  e.,  welsh,  s.,  baehrecke, 
e.h., and lenardo, m.j. (2004). science 304, 1500–1502.
yu, l., wan, f., dutta, s., welsh, s., liu, z., freundt, e., baehrecke, e.h., 
and lenardo, m. (2006). proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 103, 4952–4957.