a r t i c l e
autophagy promotes tumor cell survival and restricts necrosis,
inﬂammation, and tumorigenesis
kurt degenhardt,1,2,3,10 robin mathew,1,9,10 brian beaudoin,1,3,10 kevin bray,2,3,4 diana anderson,3
guanghua chen,1,3,5 chandreyee mukherjee,1,3,5 yufang shi,6,9 ce´ line ge´ linas,1,8,9 yongjun fan,1
deirdre a. nelson,5 shengkan jin,7,9 and eileen white1,2,3,4,9,*
1 center for advanced biotechnology and medicine, 679 hoes lane, piscataway, new jersey 08854
2 department of molecular biology and biochemistry, rutgers university, 604 allison road, piscataway, new jersey 08854
3 rutgers university, 679 hoes lane, piscataway, new jersey 08854
4 cancer institute of new jersey, 195 little albany street, new brunswick, new jersey 08903
5 howard hughes medical institute, 4000 jones bridge road, chevy chase, maryland 20815
6 department of molecular genetics, microbiology and immunology, university of medicine and dentistry of new jersey,
robert wood johnson medical school, 675 hoes lane, piscataway, new jersey 08854
7 department of pharmacology, university of medicine and dentistry of new jersey, robert wood johnson medical school,
675 hoes lane, piscataway, new jersey 08854
8 department of biochemistry, university of medicine and dentistry of new jersey, robert wood johnson medical school,
675 hoes lane, piscataway, new jersey 08854
9 university of medicine and dentistry of new jersey, robert wood johnson medical school, 675 hoes lane, piscataway,
new jersey 08854
10 these authors contributed equally to this work.
*correspondence: ewhite@cabm.rutgers.edu
summary
defective apoptosis renders immortalized epithelial cells highly tumorigenic, but how this is impacted by other common
tumor mutations is not known. in apoptosis-defective cells, inhibition of autophagy by akt activation or by allelic disruption
of beclin1 confers sensitivity to metabolic stress by inhibiting an autophagy-dependent survival pathway. while autophagy
acts to buffer metabolic stress, the combined impairment of apoptosis and autophagy promotes necrotic cell death in vitro
and in vivo. thus, inhibiting autophagy under conditions of nutrient limitation can restore cell death to apoptosis-refractory
tumors, but this necrosis is associated with inﬂammation and accelerated tumor growth. thus, autophagy may function in
tumor suppression by mitigating metabolic stress and, in concert with apoptosis, by preventing death by necrosis.
introduction
defects in type i programmed cell death or apoptosis perturb
development, promote tumorigenesis, and impair chemother-
apy, suggesting that diversion to an alternative cell death path-
way such as autophagy or necrosis in these circumstances may
be therapeutically beneﬁcial. apoptosis is a well-deﬁned pro-
cess of cellular dismantling that leads to cell corpses that are
engulfed by phagocytosis in the absence of an inﬂammatory
response and is a means for cell elimination in development
(adams, 2003; danial and korsmeyer, 2004). bcl-2 family pro-
teins are key regulators of apoptosis that are represented by
antiapoptotic proteins, such as bcl-2, and proapoptotic bax
and bak, which regulate the efﬂux of proapoptotic molecules
from mitochondria and other organelles. deﬁciency in bax
and bak or expression of bcl-2 blocks apoptosis, and this fail-
ure to execute apoptotic cell death effects development and
promotes tumorigenesis. as bcl-2 has no additional tumor-
promoting function in the absence of bax and bak, inhibition
of the bax/bak apoptotic pathway is the means by which
bcl-2 enables tumor growth (degenhardt et al., 2002a; nelson
et al., 2004; tan et al., 2005).
autophagy, or type ii programmed cell death, is a catabolic
process whereby cells self-digest intracellular organelles; how-
ever, when allowed to go to completion, autophagy is a means
of achieving cell death (edinger and thompson, 2003; levine,
2005). autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved, genetically
controlled process that results in the targeting of cellular
s i g n i f i c a n c e
while the role of apoptosis in tumor suppression is well known, the importance of other forms of cell death, autophagy and necrosis,
is only recently becoming realized. autophagy is a catabolic process initiated by starvation, whereby cells self-digest intracellular
organelles as a mechanism of cell survival or cell death. mice with an allelic loss of the essential autophagy regulator beclin1 are tumor
prone, although the mechanism involved is not known. alternatively, necrosis results in cell lysis and in cancer is associated with poor
prognosis. we show that autophagy promotes cell survival in solid tumors and that coordinate inactivation of apoptosis and autophagy
promotes necrosis and tumor progression associated with inﬂammation.
cancer cell 10, 51–64, july 2006 ª2006 elsevier inc. doi 10.1016/j.ccr.2006.06.001
51
a r t i c l e
proteins and organelles to lysosomes for degradation. this may
serve to regulate normal turnover of organelles and to remove
those with compromised function to maintain homeostasis.
however, autophagy can also be considered a temporary sur-
vival mechanism during periods of starvation where self-diges-
tion provides an alternative energy source and also may facili-
tate the disposal of unfolded proteins under stress conditions
(kamatsu et al., 2005; kuma et al., 2004). autophagy is con-
trolled by mtor downstream of pi-3 kinase/akt, which regu-
lates cell growth and protein synthesis in response to nutrient
and growth factor availability. the catabolic function provided
by autophagy is thereby suppressed when the external nutrient
supply is adequate to support cellular metabolism. defects in
autophagy profoundly perturb development, and although hap-
loinsufﬁciency in the essential autophagy gene beclin1 pro-
motes tumorigenesis, the mechanism is not known (liang
et al., 1999; qu et al., 2003; yue et al., 2003).
a third means to achieve cell death is by necrosis, which usu-
ally is associated with physical insults, failure of osmotic regula-
tion, atp depletion, hmgb1 release, cell lysis, and an inﬂamma-
tory response that may facilitate wound healing (kanduc et al.,
2002; majno and joris, 1995; nelson and white, 2004; proskur-
yakov and konoplyannikov, 2003; zeh and lotze, 2005; zong
and thompson, 2006). although necrotic cell death is not con-
sidered to be under genetic control, regulators of atp availabil-
ity such as poly-adp-ribose polymerase determine the propen-
sity for necrosis and may link necrosis to metabolic function.
finally, necrosis is a common feature of human tumors and is
associated with poor prognosis; however, the cause of necrosis
and its effects on tumor growth are not known.
we have identiﬁed an oncogene-activated pathway for ne-
crotic cell death in response to metabolic (ischemic) stress.
this pathway to necrosis requires inhibition of the primary default
mechanism of cell death, apoptosis, and occurs by inhibition
of an autophagy-dependent survival mechanism that sustains
normal cell function and viability during energy deprivation.
thus, coordinate genetic inactivation of apoptosis and auto-
phagy enables death by necrosis, suggesting that a functional
relationship exists among different death pathways to limit
necrosis. indeed, necrosis produces an inﬂammatory response
that is associated with enhanced tumor growth. thus, necrotic
cell death can be genetically controlled, and there are functional
interactions between the three cell death mechanisms. under-
standing how different forms of cell death are controlled, are
interdependent, and impact the tumor microenvironment may
yield insight into their role in cancer and into the development
of effective therapies.
results
akt promotes epithelial tumorigenesis in the presence
and absence of a functional apoptotic pathway
to determine the role of the akt pathway in epithelial tumori-
genesis and the functional relationship with apoptosis, immor-
talized baby mouse kidney epithelial (ibmk) cells that express
bax/bak (w2) or that are bax/bak-deﬁcient (d3) (degenhardt
et al., 2002b) were engineered to stably express either a consti-
tutively active form of akt (myr-akt) or ras (h-rasv12). several
ras- and akt-expressing stable clones were derived from both
w2 and d3 parental ibmk cell lines, along with vector controls.
all express e1a and p53dd, whereas bax and bak are
expressed only in w2 (figure 1a; data not shown; tan et al.,
2005). to assess the tumorigenic capacity of w2 and d3 cells
expressing either activated ras or akt, cells were injected sub-
cutaneously into nude mice.
the vector control w2 cells (w2 3.1.2, 5, and 6) were poorly tu-
morigenic with clonal tumor growth occurring beyond 3 months
postinjection (figure 1b) (degenhardt et al., 2002a; nelson et al.,
2004; tan et al., 2005). failure of w2 cells to establish tumors
efﬁciently in vivo is attributed to ischemic conditions following
implantation in vivo that result in bim-dependent, bax/bak-
mediated apoptosis that largely eliminates w2 cells (nelson
et al., 2004; tan et al., 2005). in contrast, ras rendered w2 cells
highly tumorigenic, with tumors forming within 16 days, remark-
ably faster than bax/bak-deﬁcient d3 cells (figure 1b), where
an apoptotic block enables tumor growth within 30–60 days
(degenhardt et al., 2002a; nelson et al., 2004; tan et al., 2005).
interestingly, ras enhanced d3 tumor growth, indicating a tu-
mor-promoting function independent of apoptosis regulation
(figure 1b). akt promoted w2 tumor growth, although less so
than ras (figure 1b). in contrast, akt dramatically enhanced
d3 tumor growth to nearly that of ras (figure 1b). although
akt promotes cell survival, akt-mediated acceleration of tumor
growth in bax/bak-deﬁcient cells indicates a tumor-promoting
activity independent of apoptosis inhibition. indeed, akt syner-
gizes with antiapoptotic bcl-xl to promote leukemogenesis
(karnauskas et al., 2003) and has prominent roles in regulating
cell growth and metabolism that contribute to tumorigenesis
(hanada et al., 2004). given the importance of the pi3 kinase/
akt pathway in human tumorigenesis, it was of interest to iden-
tify the apoptosis-independent function of akt that enhanced
solid tumor growth observed here.
akt promotes tumor necrosis associated with metabolic
stress when apoptosis is disabled
to examine the mechanism of enhanced tumor growth by akt,
tumors were examined histologically by hematoxylin and eosin
(h&e) and immunohistochemistry (ihc). late-forming tumors
derived from w2 cells are invasive carcinomas with a high mi-
totic rate (p-h3 staining), isolated areas of necrosis, and scat-
tered active caspase-3-positive apoptotic cells (figure 1c;
figure s1 in the supplemental data available with this article on-
line) (nelson et al., 2004). d3 tumors are invasive carcinomas
with a high mitotic rate and prevalent polyploid tumor giant cells
(figure 1c; figure s1) (degenhardt et al., 2002a; nelson et al.,
2004). isolated necrotic areas are found, but no apoptosis oc-
curs, as indicated by an absence of active caspase-3 (figure s1)
(nelson et al., 2004). evidence suggests that ischemic condi-
tions in the tumor microenvironment result in mitotic slippage
or adaptation to generate ploidy abnormalities in tumor cells
that are preserved by an apoptotic defect (nelson et al., 2004).
akt enabled w2 cells to form carcinomas with a high mitotic
rate without tumor giant cells (figure 1c; figure s1). surpris-
ingly, and in contrast to the d3 tumors, d3 akt tumors (and
also d3 ras) were largely necrotic. viable d3 akt tumor cells
were apparent in a striking growth pattern surrounding blood
vessels in layers approximately ten cells deep (figure 1c). radi-
ating outward from the regions of viable tumor was a layer of
necrotic cells typiﬁed by condensed disk-shaped nuclei and eo-
sinophilic (pink) cytoplasm, which were followed by areas of cell
debris with possible inﬁltrating host cells (see below) (figure 1c).
in contrast to d3 tumors that were nearly entirely composed of
52
cancer cell july 2006
a r t i c l e
figure 1. akt and ras promote tumor growth in both wild-type and apoptosis-defective genetic backgrounds
a: western blots showing protein expression in the w2 and d3 derived vector control and akt-expressing ibmk cell lines.
b: tumor growth kinetics of ibmk cell lines. w2 vector controls (blue) compared to w2 derivatives expressing ras (yellow). w2 vector control (blue) compared
to w2 derivatives expressing myr-akt (green). bax/bak-deﬁcient d3 (red) and w2 plus ras (yellow) are included for comparison. addition of ras to bax/bak-
deﬁcient d3 cells accelerates tumor growth as depicted by d3 (red) and d3 plus ras (yellow). akt promotes tumor growth of apoptosis-defective d3 cells as
depicted by d3 akt cells (purple). w2 (blue), w2 plus akt (green), d3 and d3 vector controls (red), and w2 plus ras (yellow) are shown for comparison.
c: h&e staining of w2, w2 akt, d3, and d3 akt tumors illustrating tumor giant cells (tgc), necrosis (n), necrotic cells (nc), blood vessels (bv), and healthy tumor
(tumor). boxes indicate location of magniﬁed areas.
d: hypoxyprobe staining (nelson et al., 2004) of d3 akt and d3 tumors indicating hypoxic conditions associated with necrotic regions in d3 akt tumors.
e: h&e staining of w2 bcl-2 tumors and w2 bcl-2 akt tumors (nelson et al., 2004) illustrating the pronounced necrosis (n) induced by akt activation indepen-
dent of the means of apoptosis inhibition.
cancer cell july 2006
53
a r t i c l e
viable tumor cells, roughly half the volume of d3 akt and d3
ras tumors was necrotic. furthermore, hypoxic conditions
localized to necrotic areas of d3 akt tumors, neither of which
were present in d3 tumors (figure 1d), suggesting that necrosis
in vivo was associated with metabolic stress.
ihc for active caspase-3 (nelson et al., 2004) indicated scant
evidence of apoptosis in d3, d3 akt, and d3 ras tumors, al-
though necrotic areas of d3 akt and d3 ras tumors showed
active caspase-3 positive cells of undetermined origin, possibly
tumor or inﬁltrating host cells (figure s1). w2 (nelson et al.,
2004), w2 akt, and w2 ras tumors displayed active cas-
pase-3 scattered throughout tumor tissue (figure s1). further-
more, akt activation in tumors where apoptosis was inhibited
by bcl-2 were necrotic, indicating that promotion of necrosis
was independent of the means of apoptosis inactivation (fig-
ure 1e). thus, activation of akt or ras stimulated tumor growth
but also activated cell death by necrosis speciﬁcally in tumors
possessing an apoptotic defect and in association with metabolic
stress. finally, the necrotic tumor phenotype was not merely
a reﬂection of rapid growth, as raf activation (raf-caax) sim-
ilarly promoted d3 tumor growth but without necrosis (data not
shown). this suggests that akt activation can profoundly sensi-
tize apoptosis-defective tumors to necrotic cell death.
akt activation in apoptosis-defective cells stimulates
necrosis in response to metabolic stress in vitro
to test the hypothesis that metabolic stress in tumors in vivo
was the stimulus for not only apoptotic cell death in w2 cells,
but also necrotic cell death in d3 akt cells, ibmk cell
lines
were subjected to ischemia in vitro. w2, w2 akt, d3, and d3
akt ibmk cell
lines were either untreated or incubated in a
1% oxygen gas mixture and no glucose that simulates ischemic
conditions in the tumor microenvironment (nelson et al., 2004),
and cells were analyzed by ﬂow cytometry. while all four cell line
genotypes displayed a normal cell cycle proﬁle when untreated,
apoptotic cell death occurred, indicated by the increase in the
sub-g1 population in treated w2 and w2 akt cells and activa-
tion of caspase-3 (figures 2a and 2b). although akt can block
apoptosis, this does not occur in ischemia, since akt requires
glucose to inhibit apoptosis (gottlob et al., 2001; plas et al.,
2001). in contrast, apoptosis-defective d3 cells remained viable
in ischemia, and cells accumulated at g2/m and beyond (fig-
ure 2a) (nelson et al., 2004) without activating caspase-3 (fig-
ure 2b). d3 akt cells, however, lost viability in ischemia due to
cellular disintegration without stimulation of caspase-3 activa-
tion (figures 2a and 2b). the dramatic induction of cell death
by akt in d3 cells required both glucose and oxygen deprivation,
as deprivation of either alone was substantially less effective.
this was also observed by trypan blue staining in multiple inde-
pendent cell lines (data not shown). electron microscopy (em)
under normal and ischemic conditions revealed apoptotic mor-
phology in ischemic w2 and w2 akt cells, and necrosis of ische-
mic d3 akt cells as indicated by vacuolated cytoplasm (fig-
ure 2c) coincident with release of the necrotic marker hmgb1
(scafﬁdi et al., 2002) from nuclei (figure 2d). thus, cell death trig-
gered by akt activation in bax/bak-deﬁcient cells under meta-
bolic stress resembles necrosis and not apoptosis, which sensi-
tized these normally death-resistant cells to cell death.
strikingly, d3 cells under ischemia displayed a highly unusual
ultrastructural morphology consisting of the accumulation of
double membrane vesicles containing cytoplasmic organelles
indicative of autophagy (figure 2c) while retaining nuclear
hmgb1 (figure 2d). autophagy can be a method of cell death
if allowed to proceed to completion; however, it is also a mecha-
nism for prolonging survival in response to nutrient depletion by
permitting the utilization of a cell-internal energy source. this
suggested that cells apoptose in response to ischemia, but
that defective apoptosis permits sustained autophagy possibly
to support survival that may be compromised by akt activation.
akt inhibits autophagy-mediated survival in ischemia
to quantitate the level of autophagy induced by ischemia in d3
compared to d3 akt cells, cytosol to membrane translocation
of the autophagy marker egfp-lc3 was monitored (mizushima
et al., 2004; tanida et al., 2004). both d3 and d3 akt cells
displayed predominantly diffuse egfp-lc3 localization under
normal growth conditions (figure 3a). in ischemia there was
a dramatic shift in the distribution of egfp-lc3 from diffuse to
punctate localization, indicative of lipidation and membrane
translocation in d3 cells that was substantially delayed in d3
akt cells (figures 3a and 3b). by 48 hr of ischemia, the percent-
age of translocated egfp-lc3 in d3 akt cells approximated
that in d3 cells (figure 3b), but by that time the viability of d3
akt cells was less than 10% compared to 90% in d3 cells (fig-
ure 2a; data not shown). similar results were obtained by exam-
ining lipidation of endogenous lc3 (data not shown). thus, in
the background of an apoptosis defect, akt activation impairs
autophagy induction in response to metabolic stress, potentially
eliminating a survival mechanism resulting in necrosis.
autophagy was also induced by ischemia prior to apoptosis
in w2 cells (from 3% to 57% at 6 hr of ischemia), and impaired
induction of autophagy was observed in w2 akt cells (from
10% to 20% at 6 hr of ischemia). in apoptosis-competent cells,
starvation induces both autophagy and apoptosis; however,
w2 and w2 akt undergo apoptosis at equal rates (figure 2a),
suggesting that the induction of autophagy does not delay or
prevent apoptosis and that apoptosis prevails over autophagy.
in contrast to normal cells (cardiac cells under neonatal starva-
tion, for example) where autophagy may delay or prevent apo-
ptosis, oncogene activation predisposes cancer cells to apo-
ptosis that may not allow survival by autophagy.
knockdown of autophagy promotes sensitivity
to metabolic stress
to test if autophagy is the mechanism used by d3 cells to sur-
vive ischemia, the expression of the essential autophagy gene
beclin1 was knocked down using rnai, and the impact on cell
viability under ischemic conditions was determined. rnai effec-
tively reduced beclin1 protein levels relative to the lamina/c
control (figure 3c), reduced autophagy induction in ischemia
(figure 3d), and impaired survival in ischemia (figure 3e). similar
results were obtained using rnai targeting a different sequence
in beclin1 or another essential autophagy gene, atg5 (figure s2).
thus, autophagy enables survival of ibmk cells to metabolic
stress when apoptosis is inactivated.
to address if autophagy is generally required for epithelial
cancer cells to survive metabolic stress, hela cells were engi-
neered with an apoptosis defect through bcl-xl or bcl-2 ex-
pression, and beclin1 was inhibited using rnai. knockdown
of beclin1 (figure 3f) signiﬁcantly reduced autophagy in meta-
bolically stressed cells with (hela) or without (hela bcl-xl or
bcl-2) the capacity for apoptosis (figure 3g). as in d3 cells,
54
cancer cell july 2006
a r t i c l e
figure 2. ischemia induces autophagy in bax/bak-deﬁcient ibmk cells that is diverted to necrosis by akt activation
a: flow cytometry of w2, w2 akt, d3, and d3 akt cells treated with ischemia in vitro for the indicated number of hours. arrows indicate the positions of 2n/g1
(left) and 4n/g2/m (right) dna content.
b: induction of caspase-3 activation in w2 and w2 akt but not in d3 or d3 akt cells in response to ischemia in vitro. western blot of cell extracts indicates p17
active caspase-3 band (arrows) and nonspeciﬁc band (*).
c: em of untreated and ischemic (48 hr) w2, w2 akt, d3, and d3 akt cells from a. note the apoptotic morphology of w2 and w2 akt cells, the autophagy
morphology of d3 cells (arrows indicate membranous organelle-like accumulations within vacuoles), and the necrotic morphology with vacuolated cyto-
plasm of d3 akt cells. insets represent progressive and distinctive endpoints indicative of autophagy (d3), or necrosis displaying a completely condensed
nucleus (d3 akt).
d: loss of nuclear hmgb1 staining in necrotic d3 akt (arrows) but not d3 cells in ischemia (48 hr) as a marker of necrosis.
knockdown of beclin1 reduced survival in hela cells expressing
bcl-xl or bcl-2 under ischemic conditions in comparison to
the lamina/c rnai controls. in contrast, beclin1 knockdown
had no effect on the viability of hela cells with an intact apop-
totic response (figure 3h). therefore, the response of epithelial
cancer cells to metabolic stress is apoptosis, which, when
cancer cell july 2006
55
a r t i c l e
figure 3. ischemia induces autophagy in apoptosis-defective cells that when inhibited by akt promotes cell death by necrosis
a: bax/bak-deﬁcient d3 cells without and with akt expressing the autophagy marker egfp-lc3 were untreated or placed under ischemic conditions for 24 hr.
egfp-lc3 displayed diffuse intracellular localization under normal growth conditions, and membrane translocation (punctate localization) indicative of
autophagy was observed in ischemic d3 cells, which was substantially inhibited in d3 akt cells.
b: quantitation of egfp-lc3 translocation in untreated and ischemic d3 and d3 akt cells (representative of three independent experiments). note that,
although the d3 akt cells treated with ischemia have a high proportion of cells with translocated lc3 by 2 days in ischemia, viability is low.
c: western blot showing knockdown of beclin1 in d3 cells relative to the lamina/c control at 24, 48, and 72 hr posttransfection under normal culture condi-
tions; hours posttransfection correspond to 0, 24, and 48 hr of ischemia in d and e.
d: reduction of autophagy in d3 cells by beclin1 rnai from c assessed by egfp-lc3 translocation.
e: knockdown of beclin1 impairs survival of d3 cells to metabolic stress. viability of d3 cells from c and d was assessed at 0, 24, and 48 hr of ischemia.
f: western blot time course of beclin1 knockdown by rnai relative to the lamina/c control under normal culture conditions in hela vector control cells and
hela cells expressing bcl-xl or bcl-2.
g: knockdown of beclin1 in hela cells impairs autophagy induction by ischemia. quantitation of egfp-lc3 translocation in untreated (0 hr) and ischemic
treated (24 and 48 hr) hela vector controls or hela cells expressing bcl-xl or bcl-2 following beclin1 or lamina/c knockdown for 24 hr by rnai.
h: knockdown of beclin1 in hela cells expressing bcl-xl or bcl-2 under ischemic conditions induces cell death. viability of hela cells without or with bcl-xl or
bcl-2 in response to ischemia with or without knockdown of beclin1 by rnai is described in e and f.
i: model for functional ordering and regulation of death pathways leading to necrosis. values represent the mean 6 standard deviation for n r 3.
error bars represent 6one standard deviation.
disabled by bax/bak deﬁciency or by bcl-xl or bcl-2 expres-
sion, permits survival by autophagy. akt activation, which in-
hibits autophagy (arico et al., 2001) (figure 2), or direct downre-
gulation of beclin1 blocks this survival pathway, stimulating
necrotic cell death (figure 3i). this reliance on autophagy for
maintenance of cellular functions during metabolic stress may
be further exacerbated by dependency on glycolytic metabo-
lism conferred by akt.
necrosis is distinct from apoptosis and is a less
efﬁcient means of cell death
the data above illustrate that genetic determinants establish
whether cells respond to metabolic stress with apoptosis,
autophagy, or necrosis. to begin to compare the result of these
three distinct responses to the same stimulus, multiﬁeld time-
lapse microscopy was used to follow cell fates over 5 days in
ischemia in vitro. w2 (figures 4a and 4b) and w2 akt (data
not shown) underwent classic apoptosis between 24 and 72 hr
characterized by an abrupt morphologic change (within 10 min)
with membrane blebbing that was completed in under an hour.
this is characteristic of apoptosis and consistent with the
apoptotic nuclear morphology and caspase-3 activation (fig-
ures 2a and 2b). cell division in ischemia was limited to less
than one prior to the onset of apoptosis (figure 4a). in contrast,
ischemia caused d3 akt cells to undergo violent cytoplasmic
vesicle movement (cytoplasmic boiling) and to become refractile
56
cancer cell july 2006
a r t i c l e
figure 4. distinct morphological
features of
apoptosis, necrosis, and autophagy in ischemia
a: identical frames from 5 day time-lapse videos
of the indicated cell lines in ischemia (1003). no
morphological changes were apparent in w2 or
d3akt cells beyond 72 and 48 hr, respectively
(data not shown). boxed cells and inset (en-
larged) show d3 akt cells undergoing lysis. at
112 hr of ischemia, d3 cells were returned to nor-
mal culture conditions and photographed 120 hr
later to document recovery. a representative
frame of the recovery of d3 cells is shown.
b: representative individual cells from a were fol-
lowed for the indicated times beginning immedi-
ately prior to any signs of altered morphology in
ischemia beginning at 13.5 hr for w2, 16.6 hr for
d3 akt, and 52.6 hr for d3.
c: impact of different modes of cell death on
clonogenic survival. w2, w2 akt, d3, and d3
akt cells were treated with ischemia for 3, 5,
and 7 days, and the potential for clonogenic
growth was determined following return to nor-
mal growth conditions (one of two replicates).
and lyse within 48 hr by a process that was clearly distinguished
from apoptosis (figures 4a and 4b). cell division in ischemic d3
akt cells was rare, with less than 10% of the cell population di-
viding prior to the onset of necrosis (figure 4a). remarkably, d3
cells surviving ischemia by autophagy continued to proliferate for
72 hr, undergoing several cell divisions, after which proliferation
and cell motility slowed to give way to progressive cellular con-
densation (condensation phase) culminating by 5 days (figures
4a and 4b). however, following condensation, these condensed
cells were not dead, as restoration of nutrients and oxygen re-
sults in reversal of this process and resumption of proliferation
for the majority of cells (figure 4a).
to compare the efﬁciency and extent of the different forms of
cell death, w2, w2 akt, d3, and d3 akt cells were incubated
under ischemic conditions for 3, 5, and 7 days, after which
they were returned to normal growth conditions and evaluated
for clonogenic survival. both w2 and w2 akt cells were killed
rapidly and efﬁciently with survival of less than 1 in 106 cells fol-
lowing 5 days of ischemia, whereas d3 cells remained nearly
completely viable even after 7 days in ischemia (figure 4c).
while d3 akt cells displayed impaired clonogenic survival as
expected, necrotic cell death was less efﬁcient and much
more asynchronous than apoptosis and resulted in gradual
102- to 103-fold impairment in clonogenic survival (figure 4c).
autophagy in tumors localizes to the center
prior to acquisition of a blood supply
to determine when and where autophagy occurred during tu-
morigenesis, tumors generated from d3 cells stably expressing
egfp-lc3 were examined for membrane translocation at 1, 3,
and 15 days following implantation in vivo. at days 1 (figure 5a)
and 3 (data not shown), egfp-lc3 localization was diffuse only
at the perimeter and was punctate, indicative of autophagy in
the center of the tumor mass. angiogenesis does not occur prior
to day 3, and tumors are hypoxic, particularly in interior regions
(nelson et al., 2004). in contrast, at day 15, by which time d3 tu-
mors have established a blood supply and are no longer hypoxic
(nelson et al., 2004), the localization of egfp-lc3 was diffuse,
with only scattered rare cells displaying punctate localization
(figure 5b). thus, autophagy localizes to unvascularized, meta-
bolic stressed regions of tumors. further conformation of the
spatial and temporal occurrence of autophagy in tumors awaits
cancer cell july 2006
57
a r t i c l e
figure 5. autophagy in tumors localizes to regions of metabolic stress prior to angiogenesis
tumors were established from d3 cells stably expressing egfp-lc3 and monitored for membrane translocation indicative of autophagy at days 1 (a) and 15 (b)
following implantation. following excision, tumors were processed for histology (frozen sections) to preserve egfp-lc3 ﬂuorescence (mizushima et al., 2004);
a section through the entire tumor at day 1 and 1/4 of the tumor at day 15 is shown by h&e (magniﬁcation 403), and a panorama across the tumor is shown
for ﬂuorescence (magniﬁcation 6003), as indicated. ‘‘e’’ and ‘‘c’’ indicate individual images from the tumor edge and center, respectively, enlarged to high-
light the differential localization of egfp-lc3 at day 1 that is diffuse at the tumor periphery and punctate in the center. due to the compactness of the cells in
the tumor, punctations may represent more than one autophagosome. day 15 tumors have recruited a blood supply and display diffuse egfp-lc3 localiza-
tion throughout the tumor.
a similar analysis of the beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/2 tumors (see
below).
role of beclin1 in oncogene-activated necrosis
to directly address the contribution of autophagy inhibition by
akt to induction of necrosis and stimulation of tumorigenesis,
ibmk cells with allelic loss of the essential autophagy gene
beclin1 were generated and examined. all beclin1+/2 and
beclin1+/+ ibmk cell lines expressed e1a and p53dd, and re-
duced beclin1 expression was observed as expected in
beclin1+/2 cell lines (figure 6a). beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/2 ibmk
cells were engineered without and with an apoptosis defect
(bcl-2 expression, figure 6a) to document the impact of a
reduced capacity for autophagy on survival and method of
cell death.
reduced constitutive autophagy was apparent in beclin1+/2
cells (1%) compared to beclin1+/+ cells (3.5%) even under nor-
mal growth conditions as measured by egfp-lc3 transloca-
tion. as with w2 cells, ischemia efﬁciently induced autophagy
in beclin1+/+ cells prior to apoptosis (59% at 6 hr of ischemia),
and allelic loss of beclin1 impaired autophagy (18% at 6 hr of
ischemia) without altering the time course of apoptosis (fig-
ure 6d). bcl-2 expression blocked apoptosis (figure 6d), and
beclin1 haploinsufﬁciency diminished constitutive autophagy
and its induction in ischemia (figures 6b and 6c). autophagy
induction levels in the bcl-2-expressing cells were robust and
similar to bak/bak-deﬁcient cells, suggesting that inhibition
of beclin1 by bcl-2 (pattingre et al., 2005; shimizu et al.,
2004) is not a signiﬁcant factor in these circumstances.
multiple independent bcl-2-expressing beclin1+/+ and
beclin1+/2 ibmk cell
lines, and representative beclin1+/+ and
beclin1+/2 cell lines without bcl-2, were incubated in ischemia,
and viability was assessed. both wild-type and beclin1+/2 cells
were readily killed over the course of 2 days as expected,
whereas wild-type cells expressing bcl-2 were markedly resis-
tant, with the number of viable cells increasing in the ﬁrst 24 hr
(figure 6d). little effect of beclin1 haploinsufﬁciency was appar-
ent in cells with an apoptotic response. in the background of an
apoptosis defect, however, beclin1 haploinsufﬁciency dimin-
ished the survival advantage provided by bcl-2 (figure 6d).
these ﬁndings are consistent with the restoration of cell death
in ischemic d3 and hela bcl-xl and bcl-2 cells, where
beclin1 and autophagy were compromised by rnai (figure 3).
to extend these observations, beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/2 ibmk
cell lines expressing bcl-2 (wb-13 and blnb-12, respectively)
were examined over the course of 3 days by time-lapse
58
cancer cell july 2006
a r t i c l e
figure 6. beclin1 haploinsufﬁciency impairs survival in ischemia in an apoptosis-defective background
a: western blot analysis of beclin1, bcl-2, e1a, p53dd, and actin in beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/2 ibmk cell lines with and without bcl-2 expression.
b: beclin1 haploinsufﬁciency impairs autophagy. beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/2 ibmk cells expressing bcl-2 (wb-3 and blnb-12) were transfected with the egfp-
lc3 expression vector and at 24 hr posttransfection were subjected to 0 and 24 hr of ischemia and were monitored for membrane translocation by ﬂuores-
cence microscopy. representative ﬁelds are shown.
c: quantitation of egfp-lc3 translocation (% autophagy) in wb-3 and blnb-12 in b following 0, 1, 2, and 3 days in ischemia.
d: beclin1 haploinsufﬁciency impairs viability in ischemia only when apoptosis is inhibited. beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/2 ibmks with and without bcl-2 were incu-
bated in ischemic conditions, and viability was assessed by trypan blue staining at the indicated times.
e: time course of morphological alterations due to beclin1 haploinsufﬁciency in ibmk cells expressing bcl-2 (wb-13 and blnb-12). beclin1+/+ cells expressing
bcl-2 proliferate, followed by cellular condensation, whereas beclin1+/2 cells expressing bcl-2 display diminished capacity to sustain proliferation and show
accelerated necrosis.
f: em (50003) of beclin1+/+ bcl-2 (wb-13) and beclin1+/2 bcl-2 (blnb-12) following 7 days in ischemia. note the condensed morphology of wb-13 and the
vacuolated and necrotic morphology of blnb-12.
cancer cell july 2006
59
a r t i c l e
figure 7. beclin1 haploinsufﬁciency promotes epithelial tumorigenesis
a: tumor growth kinetics of two beclin1+/+ (w4-2, w4-1) and two beclin1+/2 (bcln34-3, bcln4-1) ibmk cell lines.
b: tumor growth kinetics of two beclin1+/+, bcl-2-expressing (wb-10, wb-13) and two beclin1+/2, bcl-2-expressing (blnb-4, bclnb-13) ibmk cell lines.
c: histology of two beclin1+/+, bcl-2 (left) and two beclin1+/2, bcl-2 (right) tumors. one out of eight beclin1+/+, bcl-2 tumors and six out of eight beclin1+/2,
bcl-2 tumors showed evidence of necrosis (n). all tumors were between 500 and 1000 mm3 at the time of histological analysis.
microscopy. bcl-2 protected wild-type cells from cell death by
ischemia (figures 6d and 6e) similarly to d3 cells (figures 4a
and 4c), which otherwise show substantially reduced viability
by 48 hr (figures 2 and 4). bcl-2 expression in wild-type cells
allowed 1 to 2 rounds of cell division in the ﬁrst 24 hr in ischemia
(figures 6d and 6e). cellular condensation commenced on day
2 and continued through day 3, with the majority of the cells re-
taining viability (figures 6d and 6e). in contrast, the ability of
bcl-2 to provide protection from ischemia was diminished
in the beclin1+/2 cells. cell division in ischemic conditions was
halted rapidly, with only one in ﬁve cells dividing in the ﬁrst 24
hr, followed by cell death resembling necrosis (figures 6d and
6e). em revealed condensed but healthy morphology of
beclin1+/+ bcl-2 cells, but vacuolated and necrotic morphology
of beclin1+/2 bcl-2 cells by 7 days in ischemia (figure 6f), in-
dicative of failed organelle integrity (figure 6f). thus, in the
background of a defect in apoptosis, autophagy can temporarily
sustain homeostasis under conditions of metabolic stress. cells
that are defective for autophagy, however, lack this capacity to
insulate themselves from ﬂuctuations in external nutrient avail-
ability, which renders them vulnerable to metabolic stress.
autophagy deﬁciency promotes tumor
growth and necrosis
haploinsufﬁciency in beclin1 impairs autophagy and promotes
tumorigenesis in mice, and beclin1 is monoallelically deleted in
many breast, prostate, and ovarian tumors, indicating a role for
autophagy in tumor suppression (edinger and thompson,
2003; liang et al., 1999; qu et al., 2003; yue et al., 2003). dis-
abling both apoptosis and autophagy in stressed cells may be
a formula for induction of necrotic cell death, but whether this is
related to the mechanism by which beclin1 haploinsufﬁciency
promotes tumorigenesis is not known. to test the roles of defec-
tive apoptosis and autophagy on tumorigenesis, beclin1+/+ and
beclin1+/2 ibmk cells without and with bcl-2 were evaluated
for tumor growth. beclin1+/+ ibmk cells formed tumors only
with prolonged latency (greater than 2 months) (figure 7a) as ex-
pected and consistent with clonal emergence (degenhardt et al.,
2002a; nelson et al., 2004; tan et al., 2005). allelic loss of beclin1
slightly accelerated tumor growth compared to beclin1+/+ cells,
but tumor growth still took 2 months (figure 7a), consistent
with a modest increase in the frequency of clonal emergence.
bcl-2 accelerated tumor growth, which was accelerated even
further by allelic loss of beclin1 (figure 7b). thus, defective
autophagy stimulates tumor growth and synergizes with defec-
tive apoptosis to promote tumorigenesis. beclin1+/2 bcl-2
tumor growth was still substantially slower than that of the d3
akt tumors (figure 1b), suggesting that inhibition of autophagy
by akt contributes to tumorigenesis but that other akt functions
also play a role in promoting tumor growth. finally, tumor histol-
ogy revealed a greater prevalence of necrosis in bcl-2-express-
ing beclin1+/2 compared to beclin1+/+ tumors (figure 7c), consis-
tent with the possibility that altering the mode of cell death from
apoptosis or autophagy to necrosis can impact tumor growth.
beclin1 haploinsufﬁcient tumors, however, were not as necrotic
as tumors with activated akt, indicating that altered metabolism
or growth conferred by akt may further promote necrosis.
tumor necrosis stimulates an inﬂammatory response
oncogene-activated necrosis in vivo is associated with en-
hanced tumor growth. to begin to address the possibility that
there is a differential immune response to nonnecrotic and ne-
crotic tumors that may inﬂuence tumor growth, d3 and d3
akt tumors were evaluated for evidence of macrophage inﬁltra-
tion (mac3 ihc). d3 tumors showed few macrophages, whereas
the d3 akt tumors displayed massive macrophage inﬁltration
throughout all necrotic areas up to the border of healthy tumor
tissue (figure 8a); thus, tumor necrosis is associated with mac-
rophage inﬁltration. macrophages and other cells constituting
an inﬂammatory inﬁltrate produce cytokines and chemokines
that impact cell proliferation, angiogenesis, and recruitment of
other immune effector cells to the site of a wound, infection, or
tumor. indeed, strong p50 nf-kb ihc staining (both nuclear
and cytoplasmic) was observed throughout d3 akt healthy tu-
mor tissue that was less apparent in d3 tumors (figure 8b). fur-
thermore, higher activity of the cytokine and nf-kb-responsive
il-6 promoter-luc reporter was observed in d3 akt tumors
compared to d3 tumors in vivo (figure 8c). thus, oncogene-ac-
tivated tumor necrosis stimulates the innate immune response
that has the potential to impact tumor growth (figure 8d).
60
cancer cell july 2006
a r t i c l e
figure 8. tumor necrosis is associated with macrophage inﬁltration and cytokine and chemokine production
a: the macrophage marker mac3 staining of d3 (b4) and d3 akt (d5) tumors by ihc with brown staining indicating reactivity in necrotic areas (1003, insets
4003). note the high level of reactivity in necrotic areas of d3 akt tumors and the near absence of staining in d3 tumors.
b: ihc for p50 nf-kb as in a demonstrating enhanced staining in d3 akt tumors.
c: in vivo tumor necrosis is associated with enhanced activity of the cytokine-responsive il6 promoter. tumors were generated subcutaneously by injecting d3
or d3akt cells stably expressing a luciferase reporter gene under the control of three nf-kb dna binding motifs from the il6 promoter and monitored for in vivo
promoter activation. to compare the relative luminescence signals in d3 and d3 akt tumors, the total photon values were normalized to basal luminescence
activity at day 2 postinjection and compared to that after tumor growth where tumor sizes were comparable: day 15 for d3 akt with an average tumor vol-
ume of 88.9 mm3, day 29 for d3 with an average tumor volume of 82.2 mm3. the graph represents relative il6-luc activity from ﬁve individual tumors of each
genotype with the mean indicated by the bar.
d: model for hierarchy of death pathways and impact on tumor growth.
discussion
metabolic stress is a common occurrence in human tumors that
can potently induce cell death by apoptosis; however, in tumor
cells possessing an apoptotic defect this results instead in in-
duction of autophagy, which supports survival. catabolism and
elimination of damaged organelles by autophagy may serve to
maintain normal cellular function under conditions of ﬂuctuating
oxygen and nutrient supply. autophagy may thereby be beneﬁ-
cial as a buffer to short-term interruptions in nutrient availability.
the pi3-kinase/akt pathway stimulates cell growth in re-
sponse to nutrients in part through activating mtor, which pro-
motes protein synthesis while inhibiting autophagy (guertin and
sabatini, 2005). constitutive activation of this pi3-kinase/akt/
mtor signaling may render cells susceptible to metabolic ca-
tastrophe upon nutrient limitation by increasing energy demand
and promoting inefﬁcient energy production (glycolysis) while
curtailing the ability to use autophagy. constitutive activation
of akt is a common event in oncogenesis that deregulates
cell growth and uncouples nutrient availability from proper
downregulation of metabolism. the combined inactivation of
apoptosis and activation of akt results in induction of necrotic
cell death under starvation conditions, demonstrating a level
of genetic control governing the propensity for necrosis.
association of necrosis, inﬂammation,
and tumorigenesis
in tumors, as is the case for physical injury, necrosis is associ-
ated with inﬂammation. with physical
injury, inﬂammation is
part of wound healing, where cellular inﬁltration and chemokine
and cytokine production function to stimulate proliferation,
tissue remodeling, and angiogenesis to facilitate repair. the in-
ﬂammatory response to stress-mediated, oncogene-activated
necrosis in tumors, by analogy to a wound healing response,
may stimulate angiogenesis and tumor cell proliferation (balkwill
et al., 2005; balkwill and coussens, 2004; vakkila and lotze,
2004; zeh and lotze, 2005). local activation of an innate immune
response in tumors in the absence of t cells as described here
may serve to promote tumor progression but may facilitate tumor
regression by recruiting a t cell response. however, recent
cancer cell july 2006
61
a r t i c l e
evidence also suggests that tumor-associated inﬂammation can
enhance tumor progression in an immune competent host (balk-
will and coussens, 2004; greten et al., 2004; pikarsky et al.,
2004). how inﬂammation alters the tumor microenvironment
and modulates tumorigenesis requires further investigation.
apoptosis may be the preferred means of cell death for epi-
thelial cells upon damage or stress, as cell elimination occurs
without inﬂammation. if apoptosis fails, autophagy can sustain
viability in the short term and possibly lead to cell death in the
long term without inﬂammation. inhibition of autophagy in tu-
mors with a defective apoptotic response under conditions of
metabolic stress is an effective means of diverting normally
death-refractory cells to an alternate necrotic cell death path-
way. this suggests that apoptosis and autophagy function to
limit necrosis. thus, autophagy may be therapeutically targeted
for tumors with defects in apoptosis; however, stimulation of ne-
crosis and activation of an inﬂammatory response may impact
tumor growth. alternatively, exploitation of autophagy as a
means to cell death selectively in tumor cells represents another
attractive therapeutic strategy.
genetic determinants of necrosis
activation of necrotic cell death in apoptosis-defective epithelial
cells by akt and ischemia demonstrates a link between the cell’s
metabolic state, stress responses, and the function of bcl-2
family members. this suggests that necrotic cell death can be
genetically determined, oncogene activated, and triggered by
an inability to adapt to metabolic stress. indeed, parp deﬁ-
ciency mitigates necrotic cell death by delaying atp consump-
tion in response to alkylating agents (zong et al., 2004). although
the bcl-2 family is known for apoptosis regulation, our evidence
suggests that by blocking apoptosis they also may delay necro-
sis by allowing autophagy. cells can thereby undergo apoptosis,
necrosis, or autophagy depending on their genetic makeup and
the physiological conditions. this may be important for prevent-
ing inﬂammation by implementing apoptosis, and essential for
surviving periods of intermittent nutrient limitation through au-
tophagy, but may facilitate wound healing in the case of necrosis.
thus, necrosis may be a regulated process functionally interde-
pendent on apoptosis and autophagy.
establishing the genetic determinants regulating necrotic cell
death is likely to be essential for successful cancer treatment
(nelson and white, 2004) and preventing degenerative diseases
(driscoll and gerstbrein, 2003). indeed, the metabolic state of
tumor cells, speciﬁcally stimulation of aerobic glycolysis by
akt (elstrom et al., 2004), promotes necrotic cell death in re-
sponse to dna alkylating agents that may be the basis for their
successful use in chemotherapy regimens (zong et al., 2004).
exploitation of the altered metabolic state of tumors (warburg,
1956) either through the dependency on glycolysis or autophagy
may be therapeutically advantageous.
autophagy allows temporary survival to metabolic stress
beclin1 haploinsufﬁciency promotes tumorigenesis in mice
and is found with high frequency in human breast, ovarian,
and prostate cancers (liang et al., 1999; qu et al., 2003; yue
et al., 2003); however, the molecular basis by which a reduced
capacity for autophagy promotes tumorigenesis is unknown.
our data suggest that beclin1 haploinsufﬁciency may have the
largest impact on cells that also possess an apoptotic defect,
which prevents an apoptotic response to starvation, allowing
survival by autophagy. one striking observation was the initial
uninterrupted proliferation of the bax/bak-deﬁcient or bcl-2-
expressing ibmk cells in ischemia (figures 4a, 6d, and 6e).
this was contrasted by cessation of cell division, failure of or-
ganelle integrity, and facilitation of necrosis in the apoptosis-
defective cells with either activated akt or allelic loss of beclin1
where autophagy was compromised. this suggests that defec-
tive apoptosis reveals the capacity for autophagy to temporarily
sustain normal cell function in situations of ﬂuctuating nutrient
availability. autophagy may thereby mitigate the potentially
damaging impact of repetitious cycles of metabolic stress as a
tumor suppression mechanism.
impact of deﬁcient autophagy on tumorigenesis
the ability of allelic loss of beclin1 to cooperate with rb, p53,
and apoptosis defects to promote tumorigenesis (figure 7b)
suggests that deﬁcient autophagy functions in a separate path-
way. this is consistent with autophagy being downstream of
mtor, and with the loss of autophagy contributing to the tu-
mor-promoting activity of akt. it is important to consider that
the failure of tumor cells to buffer metabolic stress may promote
tumorigenesis in multiple ways, of which preventing cellular
damage and altering the tumor microenvironment by promoting
necrosis may only be part of the mechanism. it will be interesting
to determine if allelic loss of beclin1 increases genomic instabil-
ity induced by metabolic stress in cells with a defect in apoptosis
(nelson et al., 2004). alternatively, prolonged metabolic stress
may lead to autophagic cell death as a tumor suppression
mechanism, the failure of which may promote tumorigenesis
through enhanced survival of damaged cells.
experimental procedures
generation of cell lines
to obtain independent beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/2 ibmk cell lines, beclin1+/2
mice were intercrossed, and primary kidney epithelial cells from 5-day-old
pups were immortalized by e1a and dominant-negative p53 (p53dd) expres-
sion and propagated and genotyped as previously described (degenhardt
et al., 2002b; yue et al., 2003). ibmk cells expressing human bcl-2, h-
ras, raf-caax, myr-akt, and the vector controls were derived by electro-
poration with pcdna3.1-hbcl-2 (kasof et al., 1998), pcdna1.h-rasv12
(lin et al., 1995), pcdna3.raf-caax (provided by dr. peter sabbatini,
ucsf, san francisco, ca), pcdna3.myr-akt (plas et al., 2001), or vector
(w2, pcdna3.1; d3, pcdna3.1zeo, invitrogen, carlsbad, ca), followed by
selection (w2, geneticin; d3, zeocin). tumor formation by subcutaneous
injection in nude mice was described previously (degenhardt et al., 2002a)
(see supplemental data). hela cells and those expressing human bcl-xl
or bcl-2 were derived by electroporation with vector (pcdna3.1, invitrogen),
pcdna3.1-h-bcl-xl (han et al., 1998), or pcdna3.1-hbcl-2 (kasof et al.,
1998), respectively, followed by selection with geneticin and veriﬁcation of
protein expression and function.
western blotting, ihc, immunoﬂuorescence, and em
the following antibodies were used: anti-beclin1 (santa cruz, santa cruz,
ca); anti-atg5 (mizushima et al., 2001); anti-bax and -bak (upstate bio-
technology, lake placid, ny); anti-bcl-2 (santa cruz); anti-p53 (ab-1);
anti-e1a and -actin (oncogene, cambridge, ma); anti-hmgb1 (abcam,
cambridge, ma); anti-p50 (santa cruz); and anti-mac3 (bd pharmingen).
western blotting and ihc were performed as previously described (nelson
et al., 2004). cells were examined by em using a jeol 1200ex electron
microscope.
in vitro ischemia
cells were placed in glucose-free dmem (invitrogen) containing 10% fbs
and incubated with a deﬁned gas mixture containing 1% oxygen, 5% co2,
62
cancer cell july 2006
and 94% n2 (airgas, piscataway, nj) (nelson et al., 2004). viability was as-
sessed by trypan blue exclusion, and egfp-lc3 translocation was quanti-
tated by determining the number of transfected cells displaying any indica-
tion of punctate (rather than diffuse) ﬂuorescence out of a population of
300 cells. determination of dna content by facs analysis of propidium
iodide-stained cells was performed using a cytomics fc 500 (beckman
coulter). multiﬁeld time-lapse was performed as described in the supple-
mental data.
rna interference
cells were transfected with annealed, puriﬁed, and desalted double-
stranded sirna (30 mg/3 3 106 cells) using the amaxa nucleofection system
(kit v, program g-16). sirna targeted against beclin1 (50-aacuugcuuuac
ucucucuauca-30) (shimizu et al., 2004) (figure s2) or (50-caguuuggca
caaucaauauu-30) (hoyer-hansen et al., 2005) (figure 3), murine atg5 (50-
aagauccuggaccggucacc-30) (shimizu et al., 2004), and lamina/c
were obtained from dharmacon research (lafayette, co).
in vivo luciferase reporter assays
tumors were monitored for in vivo promoter activation by using an ivis
in vivo luminescence imaging system (xenogen corp., alameda, ca) by
intraperitoneal
injection with d-luciferin potassium salt (xenogen corp.)
approximately 15 min prior to imaging using an iacuc-approved protocol.
luminescence bio-photonic quantitation (photons/cm2/s) was analyzed
using living image software (xenogen corp.). the total photon values
were normalized to basal luminescence activity at day 2 postinjection and
compared to that after tumor growth where tumor sizes were comparable.
supplemental data
the supplemental data include supplemental experimental procedures and
two supplemental ﬁgures and can be found with this article online at http://
www.cancercell.org/cgi/content/full/10/1/51/dc1/.
acknowledgments
we thank thomasina sharkey for assistance with preparation of the manu-
script. this work was supported by a grant from the national institutes of
health (r37 ca53370) to e.w. and the howard hughes medical institute.
we thank raj patel for assistance with the em and drs. plas, sabbatini,
and mizushima for providing reagents.
received: february 27, 2006
revised: april 21, 2006
accepted: june 1, 2006
published: july 17, 2006
references
adams, j.m. (2003). ways of dying: multiple pathways to apoptosis. genes
dev. 17, 2481–2495.
arico, s., petiot, a., bauvy, c., dubbelhuis, p.f., meijer, a.j., codogno, p.,
and ogier-denis, e. (2001). the tumor suppressor pten positively regulates
macroautophagy by inhibiting the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein
kinase b pathway. j. biol. chem. 276, 35243–35246.
balkwill, f., and coussens, l.m. (2004). cancer: an inﬂammatory link. nature
431, 405–406.
balkwill, f., charles, k.a., and mantovani, a. (2005). smoldering and polar-
ized inﬂammation in the initiation and promotion of malignant disease.
cancer cell 7, 211–217.
danial, n.n., and korsmeyer, s.j. (2004). cell death: critical control points.
cell 116, 205–219.
degenhardt, k., chen, g., lindsten, t., and white, e. (2002a). bax and bak
mediate p53-independent suppression of tumorigenesis. cancer cell 2,
193–203.
a r t i c l e
degenhardt, k., sundararajan, r., lindsten, t., thompson, c.b., and white,
e. (2002b). bax and bak independently promote cytochrome-c release from
mitochondria. j. biol. chem. 277, 14127–14134.
driscoll, m., and gerstbrein, b. (2003). dying for a cause: invertebrate genet-
ics takes on human neurodegeneration. nat. rev. genet. 4, 181–194.
edinger, a.l., and thompson, c.b. (2003). defective autophagy leads to
cancer. cancer cell 4, 422–424.
elstrom, r.l., bauer, d.e., buzzai, m., karnauskas, r., harris, m.h., plas,
d.r., zhuang, h., cinalli, r.m., alavi, a., rudin, c.m., and thompson, c.b.
(2004). akt stimulates aerobic glycolysis in cancer cells. cancer res. 64,
3892–3899.
gottlob, k., majewski, n., kennedy, s., kandel, e., robey, r.b., and hay, n.
(2001). inhibition of early apoptotic events by akt/pkb is dependent on the
ﬁrst committed step of glycolysis and mitochondrial hexokinase. genes
dev. 15, 1406–1418.
greten, f.r., echmann, l., greten, t.f., park, j.m., li, z.w., egan, l.j.,
kagnoff, m.f., and karin, m. (2004). ikkb links inﬂammation and tumorigen-
esis in a mouse model of colitis-associated cancer. cell 118, 285–296.
guertin, d.a., and sabatini, d.m. (2005). an expanding role for mtor in
cancer. trends mol. med. 11, 353–361.
han, j., modha, d., and white, e. (1998). interaction of e1b 19k with bax is
required to block bax-induced loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and
apoptosis. oncogene 17, 2993–3005.
hanada, m., feng, j., and hemmings, b.a. (2004). structure, regulation and
function of pkb/akt—a major therapeutic target. biochim. biophys. acta
1697, 3–16.
hoyer-hansen, m., bastholm, l., mathiasen, i.s., elling, f., and jaattela, m.
(2005). vitamin d analog eb1089 triggers dramatic lysosomal changes and
beclin 1-mediated autophagic cell death. cell death differ. 12, 1297–1309.
kamatsu, m., waguri, s., ueno, t., iwata, j., murato, s., tanida, i., ezaki, j.,
mizushima, n., ohsumi, y., uchiyama, y., et al. (2005). impairment of starva-
tion-induced and constitutive autophagy in atg7-deﬁcient mice. j. cell biol.
169, 425–434.
kanduc, d., mittelman, a., serpico, r., sinigaglia, e., sinha, a.a., natale, c.,
santacroce, r., dicorcia, m.g., lucchese, a., and dini, l. (2002). cell death:
apoptosis versus necrosis. int. j. oncol. 21, 165–170.
karnauskas, r., niu, q., talapatra, s., plas, d.r., greene, m.e., crispino,
j.d., and rudin, c.m. (2003). bcl-xl and akt cooperate to promote leukemo-
genesis in vivo. oncogene 22, 688–698.
kasof, g.m., rao, l., and white, e. (1998). btf: a novel death-promoting tran-
scriptional repressor that interacts with bcl-2 related proteins. mol. cell. biol.
19, 4390–4404.
kuma, a., hatano, m., matsui, m., yamamoto, a., nakaya, h., yoshimori, t.,
ohsumi, y., tokuhisa, t., and mizushima, n. (2004). the role of autophagy
during the early neonatal starvation period. nature 432, 1032–1036.
levine, b. (2005). eating oneself and uninvited guests: autophagy-related
pathways in cellular defense. cell 120, 159–162.
liang, x.h., jackson, s., seaman, m., brown, k., kempkes, b., hibshoosh,
h., and levine, b. (1999). induction of autophagy and inhibition of tumorigen-
esis by beclin 1. nature 402, 672–676.
lin, h.-j.l., eivner, v., prendergast, g.c., and white, e. (1995). activated h-
ras rescues e1a-induced apoptosis and cooperates with e1a to overcome
p53-dependent growth arrest. mol. cell. biol. 15, 4536–4544.
majno, g., and joris, i. (1995). apoptosis, oncosis, and necrosis. an overview
of cell death. am. j. pathol. 146, 3–15.
mizushima, n., yamamoto, a., hatano, m., kobayashi, y., kabeya, y., su-
zuki, k., tokuhisa, t., ohsumi, y., and yoshimori, t. (2001). dissection of au-
tophagosome formation using apg5-deﬁcient mouse embryonic stem cells.
j. cell biol. 152, 657–668.
mizushima, n., yamamoto, a., matsui, m., yoshimori, t., and ohsumi, y.
(2004). in vivo analysis of autophagy in response to nutrient starvation using
transgenic mice expressing a ﬂuorescent autophagosome marker. mol. biol.
cell 15, 1101–1111.
cancer cell july 2006
63
a r t i c l e
nelson, d., and white, e. (2004). exploiting different ways to die. genes dev.
18, 1223–1226.
nelson, d., tan, t.-t., rabson, a.b., anderson, d., degenhardt, k., and
white, e. (2004). hypoxia and defective apoptosis drive genomic instability
and tumorigenesis. genes dev. 18, 2095–2107.
pattingre, s., tassa, a., qu, x., garuti, r., liang, x.h., mizushima, n., packer,
m., schneider, m.d., and levine, b. (2005). bcl-2 antiapoptotic proteins
inhibit beclin 1-dependent autophagy. cell 122, 927–939.
pikarsky, e., porat, r.m., stein, i., abramovitch, r., amit, s., kasem, s.,
gutkovich-pyest, e., urieli-shoval, s., galun, e., and ben-neriah, y.
(2004). nf-kb functions as a tumour promoter in inﬂammation-associated
cancer. nature 431, 461–466.
plas, d.r., talapatra, s., edinger, a.l., rathmell, j.c., and thompson, c.b.
(2001). akt and bcl-xl promote growth factor-independent survival through
distinct effects on mitochondrial physiology. j. biol. chem. 276, 12041–
12048.
proskuryakov, s.y., and konoplyannikov, a.g. (2003). necrosis: a speciﬁc
form of programmed cell death? exp. cell res. 283, 1–16.
qu, x., yu, j., bhagat, g., furuya, n., hibshoosh, h., troxel, a., rosen, j.,
eskelinen, e.l., mizushima, n., ohsumi, y., et al. (2003). promotion of tumor-
igenesis by heterozygous disruption of the beclin 1 autophagy gene. j. clin.
invest. 112, 1809–1820.
scafﬁdi, p., misteli, t., and bianchi, m.e. (2002). release of chromatin protein
hmgb1 by necrotic cells triggers inﬂammation. nature 418, 191–195.
shimizu, s., kanaseki, t., mizushima, n., mizuta, t., arakawa-kobayashi, s.,
thompson, c.b., and tsujimoto, y. (2004). role of bcl-2 family proteins in
a non-apoptotic programmed cell death dependent on autophagy genes.
nat. cell biol. 6, 1221–1228.
tan, t.-t., degenhardt, k., nelson, d.a., beaudoin, b., nieves-neira, w.,
bouillet, p., villunger, a., adams, j.m., and white, e. (2005). key roles of
bim-driven apoptosis in epithelial tumors and rational chemotherapy. can-
cer cell 7, 227–238.
tanida, i., ueno, t., and kominami, e. (2004). lc3 conjugation system in
mammalian autophagy. int. j. biochem. cell biol. 36, 2503–2518.
vakkila, j., and lotze, m.t. (2004). inﬂammation and necrosis promote
tumour growth. nat. rev. immunol. 4, 641–648.
warburg, o. (1956). on respiratory impairment in cancer cells. science 124,
269–270.
yue, z., jin, s., yang, c., levine, a.j., and heintz, n. (2003). beclin 1, an
autophagy gene essential for early embryonic development, is a haploinsufﬁ-
cient tumor suppressor. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 100, 15077–15082.
zeh, h.j.i., and lotze, m.t. (2005). addicted to death. j. immunother. 28, 1–9.
zong, w.x., and thompson, c.b. (2006). necrotic death as a cell fate. genes
dev. 20, 1–15.
zong, w.-x., ditsworth, d., bauer, d.e., wang, z.-q., and thompson, c.b.
(2004). alkylating dna damage stimulates a regulated form of necrotic cell
death. genes dev. 18, 1272–1282.
64
cancer cell july 2006