experimental gerontology 42 (2007) 120–128
www.elsevier.com/locate/expgero
chaperone-mediated autophagy in aging and
neurodegeneration: lessons from a-synuclein
urmi bandhyopadhyay, ana maria cuervo *
department of anatomy and structural biology, marion bessin liver research center, albert einstein college of medicine, bronx, ny 10461, usa
received 10 may 2006; received in revised form 19 may 2006; accepted 23 may 2006
available online 24 july 2006
abstract
diﬀerent conditions, ranging from genetic mutation to post-translational modiﬁcation, result in the intracellular presence of misfold-
ed or conformationally altered proteins. these abnormal proteins tend to organize in toxic oligomeric structures often resulting in cel-
lular death. alterations in the function of the surveillance systems that normally repair or remove abnormal proteins are the basis of
many neurodegenerative disorders. in this review, we focus on such protein conformational disorders and on the role that altered func-
tion of intracellular proteolytic systems, in particular autophagy, plays in the evolution of these diseases. using parkinson disease as a
main example, we recapitulate the diﬀerent stages of this protein conformational disorder at the cellular level and relate them with chang-
es in the diﬀerent types of autophagy. finally, we also comment on the eﬀect that aggravating conditions, such as oxidative stress and
aging, have on the functioning of the autophagic system and its ability to cope with altered proteins.
ó 2006 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.
keywords: protein conformational disorders; chaperones; lysosomes; proteases; parkinson disease
1. introduction
2. autophagy overview
chaperones and proteolytic systems are the two major
components of the cellular surveillance systems that keep
misbehaving proteins ‘‘in check’’. proper functioning of
these quality control systems is essential for cell survival,
because otherwise, altered proteins organize into toxic mul-
timeric structures that lead to cell death. two major prote-
olytic systems participate in normal protein turnover and
in the removal of altered proteins: the ubiquitin/protea-
some system and the lysosomes. this review focuses on
the contribution of lysosomes to the clearance of intracel-
lular components, a task generally known as autophagy,
and in particular on the role that a selective autophagic
mechanism and its interplay with the other autophagic pro-
cesses plays in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative
disorders.
* corresponding author. tel.: +1 718 430 2689; fax: +1 718 430 8975.
e-mail address: amcuervo@aecom.yu.edu (a.m. cuervo).
0531-5565/$ - see front matter ó 2006 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.exger.2006.05.019
(soluble proteins and organelles)
autophagy (self-eating in greek) is the general term
used to refer to the degradation of intracellular compo-
nents
in lysosomes
(klionsky, 2005; levine and yuan, 2005; mizushima,
2005; cuervo, 2004). this process is, for the most part,
highly conserved evolutionarily, therefore allowing the
use of very diverse systems (from yeast, ﬂies, worms to
mammals) for its molecular dissection and for the study
of its regulatory mechanisms described in detail in recent
reviews (klionsky, 2005; levine and yuan, 2005; mizushi-
ma, 2005; ohsumi and mizushima, 2004). for decades, the
main recognized functions for autophagy were in the con-
tinuous
(cellular
homeostasis) and in the adaptation to poor nutritional con-
ditions. the degradation of intracellular proteins through
autophagy provides the amino acids required for the syn-
thesis of new proteins during starvation (mizushima,
2005). however, in recent years, an expanded myriad of
intracellular functions has been shown to require proper
turnover of
intracellular organelles
u. bandhyopadhyay, a.m. cuervo / experimental gerontology 42 (2007) 120–128
121
functioning of the autophagic machinery including among
others, pathogen-to-host defense, cellular diﬀerentiation,
tissue remodeling, growth control, adaptation to adverse
environments and mechanisms related to cell death and cell
survival
in response to intra and extracellular stresses
(klionsky, 2005; levine and yuan, 2005; mizushima,
2005). of particular interest for this review, is the role of
autophagy as part of the intracellular quality control sys-
tems, which has directly linked it to protein conformational
disorders and neurodegeneration.
3. types of autophagy
the ﬁnal step of all autophagic processes is the degrada-
tion of the substrate (cargo) by the lysosomal proteases.
however, depending on the mechanisms that participate
in the delivery of cargo to lysosomes, three diﬀerent types
of autophagy have been described in mammalian cells:
macroautophagy, microautophagy, and chaperone-medi-
ated autophagy (cma) (fig. 1) (cuervo, 2004; klionsky,
2005). although each of them have individual characteris-
tics and are activated in particular conditions, recent stud-
ies
are
interconnected and often share common components. this
cross-talk among diﬀerent autophagic systems, discussed in
more detail below, seems to play a critical role in condi-
tions resulting in the failure of one of these systems, since
it allows the activation of compensatory mechanisms.
autophagic
pathways
support
that
all
molecular dissection of macro- and microautophagy has
been possible by performing genetic screening in yeast
mutants which have rendered a still growing list of genes
related to these processes (autophagy-related genes or
atg) (klionsky et al., 2003). mammalian homologues
have been identiﬁed for most of these genes, allowing
manipulations of autophagy (by knocking down or over-
expressing atg genes) to elucidate the contribution of
autophagy to diﬀerent physiological and pathological pro-
cesses. cma has only been described in mammals, thus
limiting the use of genetic screening for its study. however,
the combination of biochemical, morphological and immu-
nological procedures with antisense and rna interference
approaches has helped in the molecular characterization of
this pathway (majeski and dice, 2004).
although recent evidence supports macroautophagy
activity under basal conditions in some tissues (hara
et al., 2006), macroautophagy is for the most part an induc-
ible autophagic pathway upregulated in response to stress
(nutritional stress, viral infection, etc.). in this form of
autophagy, an isolation membrane, of still uncertain ori-
gin, forms as a result of the activation of two conjugation
cascades, a lipid-to-protein conjugation and a protein-to-
protein conjugation (mizushima et al., 2002; ohsumi and
mizushima, 2004) (fig. 1). the isolation or limiting mem-
brane elongates and wraps around the substrates and
ﬁnally seals to form a double membrane vesicle (auto-
phagosome or autophagic vacuole (av)). after fusion of
microautophagy
soluble 
proteins
membrane 
receptor 
cytosolic 
substrate 
protein
chaperone/
cochaperones
organelles
isolating 
membrane
lysosomal
chaperone
chaperone-mediated
autophagy
lysosome
autophagosome
pre-autophagosome
macroautophagy
fig. 1. diﬀerent types of autophagy in mammalian cells. three diﬀerent types of autophagy have been described in mammalian cells depending on the
mechanisms used for the delivery of intracellular cargo to lysosomes. in macroautophagy, intracellular components are sequestered by a limiting
membrane to form a double membrane vesicle or autophagosome, which acquires the enzymes required for degradation by fusion with lysosomes. in
microautophagy, the lysosomal membrane deforms to trap regions of the cytosol, which are internalized as single membrane vesicles that pinch oﬀ into the
lysosomal lumen. in chaperone-mediated autophagy, proteins are directly targeted to lysosomes by a chaperone/cochaperones complex, bind to a
membrane receptor, and are translocated into the lysosomal lumen assisted by a lysosome resident chaperone.
122
u. bandhyopadhyay, a.m. cuervo / experimental gerontology 42 (2007) 120–128
the outer membrane of the autophagosome with lyso-
somes, ﬁrst the inner membrane and then the substrates
inside become accessible to lysosomal proteases. activation
of macroautophagy is often detected by the presence of
autophagic vacuoles in the cytosol. however, both, an
increase in formation of avs as well as the impaired ability
to eliminate them through lysosomal fusion could result in
an increase in avs (mizushima, 2004). combination of
morphological methods and measurement of lysosomal
protein degradation is thus necessary to determine whether
the sequestered cargo is indeed cleared up by macroauto-
phagy (mizushima, 2004).
delivery of whole regions of cytosol to lysosomes is also
possible via microautophagy but, in this case, the lysosome
itself deforms to engulf the cytosolic cargo (fig. 2) (morti-
more et al., 1988). vesicles or tubes carrying the cytosolic
substrates pinch oﬀ into the lysosomal lumen where they
are rapidly degraded. although microautophagy is still
poorly understood, it is generally accepted as the type of
autophagy that is constitutively active. direct engulfment
of particular organelles by the vacuole, (equivalent to lyso-
somes in yeast), has been well characterized in diﬀerent
yeast strains (uttenweiler et al., 2005), and several genes
involved in this process have been identiﬁed. however,
because no homologues
these genes have been
for
described yet in mammals, our understanding of micro-
autophagy in mammals is still very limited.
two characteristics diﬀerentiate chaperone-mediated
autophagy (cma), from the other two types of autophagy:
the selective delivery of substrates to lysosomes and the
mechanism by which they reach the lysosomal lumen (maj-
eski and dice, 2004; massey et al., 2004). only particular
cytosolic proteins containing a targeting motif, biochemi-
cally related to the pentapeptide kferq, are recognized
by a cytosolic chaperone, the heat shock cognate protein
of 70 kda (hsc70), which targets them to the surface of
lysosomes (fig. 1). once at the lysosomal membrane the
chaperone/substrate complex interacts with the lysosome-
associated membrane protein type 2a (lamp-2a), which
acts as a receptor for this pathway. the substrate protein
then crosses the lysosomal membrane assisted by a chaper-
one resident in the lysosomal
lumen, and it is rapidly
degraded (majeski and dice, 2004; massey et al., 2004).
although the nature of the membrane transporter is still
not well characterized, the mechanisms by which cma
substrates access the lysosomal
lumen diﬀers from the
other types of autophagy as these substrates are translocat-
ed molecule-by-molecule, they need to be previously disas-
sembled and unfolded, and their uptake does not involve
deformation (tubules or invaginations) of the lysosomal
co m pensatory stage
cma
macroautophagy
cma
arly sta
activation of macroautophagy after 
cma and proteasome decline facilitates 
removal of cytosolic aggregates
proteasome
lys
cma
lys
macroautophagy
proteasome
lys
soluble proteins are eliminated 
by the ubiquitin proteasome 
system or by cma
autophagy is used to completely 
eliminate the damaged neuron 
(autophagic cell death)
fig. 2. autophagic changes during the progression of protein conformational disorders. in an early stage of the disease, the soluble forms of the altered
protein are removed by the ubiquitin/proteasome system or in lysosomes by cma. as the disease progresses, the altered proteins or its products alter
proteasome and/or cma activity. cells respond to this inhibition by increasing macroautophagy, to remove toxic forms of the protein and aggregates.
with the time or when aggravating conditions, such as oxidative stress, concur, a failure in macroautophagy could be the main responsible for
accumulation of toxic proteins, altered cell function and eventually cell death.
u. bandhyopadhyay, a.m. cuervo / experimental gerontology 42 (2007) 120–128
123
membrane. in contrast to the other two types of autopha-
gy, cma has only been described in mammals, supporting
late appearance in the phyologenetic scale. in fact, the lyso-
somal receptor is not conserved in yeast, worms or even
ﬂies. cma is present in most types of mammalian cells
but its activity varies from cell type to cell type and also
depending on the cellular conditions (massey et al.,
2004). some cma activity can be detected under basal
conditions, but maximal activation of cma has been
described under stress conditions such as prolonged nutri-
tional stress, mild oxidative stress or exposure to diﬀerent
toxic compounds which result in damage of particular pro-
teins (massey et al., 2004).
4. autophagy: one of the two surveillance systems to control
misbehaving proteins
the term ‘‘protein conformational disorders’’ is used
here in a wide sense, including all those conditions in which
modiﬁcations on a protein (mutations or post-translational
modiﬁcations) alter its normal folded structure, favoring
the formation of soluble oligomers which eventually accu-
mulate inside cells as insoluble aggregates (i.e., inclusion
bodies) (kopito, 2000). although protein aggregates were
considered to be detrimental for cell function, recent stud-
ies point toward aggregation as a protective mechanism
against the more toxic soluble oligomeric forms of these
altered proteins (kopito, 2000). in any case, the presence
of either aggregates or soluble toxic forms of the proteins
is particularly harmful in diﬀerentiated non-dividing cells,
such as neurons. protein conformational disorders primar-
ily aﬀecting neuronal cells are commonly grouped under
the term ‘‘neurodegeneration’’. neurons do not readily tol-
erate the presence of toxic protein complexes, which often
results in neuronal loss.
in many instances,
cells have two fronts of defense against the presence of
these misfolded or altered proteins – chaperones and prote-
olytic systems – which usually act in concert (markossian
and kurganov, 2004). diﬀerent chaperones have the ability
to bind to altered proteins and facilitate their folding.
however,
if the protein is severely
altered or the cellular conditions are not favorable for
refolding of proteins, chaperones are also responsible for
the delivery of the altered proteins to the proteolytic sys-
tems for degradation. the molecular basis determining this
ability of chaperones to decide between refolding and deg-
radation is not completely understood. in the case of
chip, one of the chaperones described to target proteins
for degradation, when protein folding is not successful,
the chaperone itself interacts with components of a tagging
system (ubiquitin ligases) which add a tag (ubiquitin) to the
altered protein facilitating its recognition by the protea-
some (mcdonough and patterson, 2003). as described
above, hsc70 is another chaperone that targets proteins
for degradation, although in this case in lysosomes via
cma. this multifunctional character of chaperones gets
even more complex, as recent reports suggest that a single
chaperone could decide not only between refolding or deg-
radation, but also between degradation through the protea-
some or the lysosomal system. thus, interaction of chip
with particular unfolded proteins favors their degradation
in lysosomes, although the molecular basis for this process
remains unknown (shin et al., 2005).
5. why do altered proteins accumulate inside cells?
both, abnormally high levels of misfolded proteins and/
or malfunctioning of
the cellular surveillance systems
(chaperones and proteases) could favor the accumulation
of altered proteins inside cells. in many protein conforma-
tional disorders, although the changes in the particular
protein prone to aggregation are present since early in life
(genetic alteration), its intracellular accumulation is not
detected until later in life. this late-onset often reﬂects an
added precipitation component (i.e., condition such as oxi-
dative stress could suddenly increase the amount of altered
proteins and overcome the capability of the chaperone/pro-
teolytic systems) (kiﬃn et al., 2006). a functional decay
with age of these surveillance systems also seems to con-
tribute to the late onset of these disorders. in fact, both
the activity of
the ubiquitin/proteasome system and
autophagy have been shown to decline with age (cuervo
et al., 2005; martinez-vicente et al., 2005). the reduced
rates of macroautophagy observed in most mammalian cell
types are in part due to alterations in its regulation, which
make cells less responsive to stimuli that will normally acti-
vate this process (bergamini et al., 2004). in addition, the
accumulation of undigested products inside secondary
lysosomes, in the form of lipofuscin, has been shown to
be directly responsible for the poor clearance of already
formed avs observed in old tissues (terman and brunk,
2004). in the case of cma, the reduced activity results pri-
marily from an age-dependent decrease in the levels of the
cma lysosomal receptor (massey et al., 2004). little is still
known about the temporal occurrence of these age-related
defects, and whether they progress independently or if, on
the contrary, the malfunctioning of a proteolytic system
results in the overloading of the still functional ones con-
tributing to their failure.
6. autophagy, the newcomer
alterations of the proteasome system is a common fea-
ture of protein conformational disorders and in particular
of neurodegenerative diseases (bennett et al., 2005; grune
et al., 2004; kopito, 2000). the selectivity of the degrada-
tion of proteins through this system makes it an ideal can-
didate when removal of only the altered, but not normal
functional proteins, is required. participation of the ubiqui-
tin/proteasome in the removal of altered proteins is sup-
ported by the fact
that abnormal prone-to-aggregate
proteins are often ubiquitinated, they interact with diﬀerent
components of this system (ligases or subunits of the pro-
teasome) and blockage of the proteolytic activity of the
124
u. bandhyopadhyay, a.m. cuervo / experimental gerontology 42 (2007) 120–128
proteasome increases formation of protein aggregates
(bennett et al., 2005; grune et al., 2004; kopito, 2000).
in fact, malfunctioning of this system is common in many
neurodegenerative disorders. incubation of the proteasome
with some of these misfolded proteins once organized as
oligomeric complexes or with their proteolytic products
has been shown to inhibit the activity of this protease (ben-
nett et al., 2005; betarbet et al., 2005; flood et al., 2005).
lower proteasome activity and higher levels of ubiquitina-
ted proteins, likely as reﬂection of their impaired degrada-
tion through this
common in most
neurodegenerative processes.
system,
are
along with ubiquitin-containing protein aggregates,
aﬀected neurons in these disorders often contain large vac-
uolated structures, especially in advanced stages of neuro-
degeneration (nixon et al., 2005). although the presence
of these structures has long been known, only recently
has closer attention been paid to their nature and their pos-
sible participation in the pathogenesis of these disorders
(rubinsztein et al., 2005). initial electronmicrographs of
neuronal cells showing double membrane vacuoles contain-
ing partially digested organelles supported the idea that the
cells were ‘‘eating themselves’’, and that macroautophagy
was activated as a mechanism of cell death. however, clos-
er inspection of this process revealed that the role of
autophagy in neurodegeneration is not as simple as it ini-
tially appeared, and that the activation of this process
could have multiple outcomes in these disorders. thus,
autophagy could have a deleterious or protective eﬀect
depending on the stage of the neurodegeneration.
7. a dual role for autophagy in cell survival/cell death
the dual role for macroautophagy in cell death and cell
survival is not restricted to neurodegenerative disorders. in
fact, it was ﬁrst proposed in oncogenic processes in which
both inhibition and stimulation of autophagy was shown
to result in cancer cells’ survival (kondo et al., 2005;
ogier-denis and codogno, 2003). a more systematic anal-
ysis has revealed that depending on the cancer type, stage
and degree of cell diﬀerentiation, cancer cells activate or
suppress autophagy to guarantee their survival (kondo
et al., 2005; ogier-denis and codogno, 2003). reduced
macroautophagy would be advantageous in early stages
of tumorogenesis as unbalance toward protein synthesis
versus degradation could help to support cell division
and clonigenicity. however, in the case of solid tumors
activation of macroautophagy is required to guarantee sur-
vival of cancer cells distant from nutritional sources until
angiogenesis occurs (kondo et al., 2005; ogier-denis and
codogno, 2003). in large tumors, the presence of diﬀerent
microenvironments with uneven access to nutrients results
in a more complicated picture where both cells with upreg-
ulated and downregulated macroautophagy can be detect-
ed (gozuacik and kimchi, 2004). a similar picture is likely
to occur in the degenerating brain, where neurons in diﬀer-
ent stages of these aggregopathies co-exist.
the role of macroautophagy as a pro-survival mecha-
nism is widely accepted under conditions of nutrient depri-
vation where it becomes the main source of essential
components required for energy and homeostasis mainte-
nance (mizushima, 2005). also in conditions resulting in
extensive damage of intracellular components, in particular
mitochondria, activation of macroautophagy has been
shown to help cell survival. in this case, the beneﬁcial eﬀect
of macroautophagy could result from the elimination of
those altered components that otherwise could activate
apoptotic mechanisms (i.e., leakage of cytochrome c from
altered mitochondria is a common pro-apototic stimuli)
(debnath et al., 2005).
recently, the interaction between an anti-apototic (bcl-
2) and an autophagic eﬀector (beclin-1) has been proposed
to be the crossroad between this dual role of autophagy in
cell survival and cell death (pattingre et al., 2005). interac-
tion of bcl-2 with beclin-1 inhibits macroautophagy, while
low levels of bcl-2 activate this autophagic pathway. dis-
ruption of the interaction between beclin-1 and bcl-2 and
consequently,
the negative feed back loop, results in
increased cellular death, which can be prevented if macro-
autophagy is blocked. this result supports thus the require-
ment
the
macroautophagic response: ineﬃcient activation of macro-
autophagy increases cell vulnerability and often results in
cell death, but activation of macroautophagy beyond a cer-
tain level could become cause of cell death (pattingre et al.,
2005).
activation
balance
the
of
for
in
8. macroautophagy to the rescue?
in addition to the dual role for macroautophagy in dif-
ferent pathologies, recent ﬁndings have prompted a recon-
sideration of the initially proposed role of macroautophagy
as the cause of neuronal death in neurodegenerative
disorders.
one of
the ﬁrst observations confronting this role
showed that upregulation of macroautophagy, by treat-
ment with rapamycin, reduced toxicity of polyglutamine
expansions in mouse models of huntington’s disease
(ravikumar et al., 2004). a similar beneﬁcial eﬀect is likely
to occur in other neurodegenerative disorders such as par-
kinson’s disease, because aggregate forms of a-synuclein,
one of the proteins altered in this disorder, can also be
removed via macroautophagy in cultured cells (webb
et al., 2003). these initial reports on the use of macroauto-
phagy activators for the removal of aggregate proteins
were received with caution, since it was diﬃcult to reconcile
how random degradation of cytosolic regions, could be
maintained for prolonged periods of time without aﬀecting
normal cellular function (i.e., accelerated turnover of
organelles could be a high price to pay for the removal of
aggregate proteins). recent studies oﬀer a possible expla-
nation as to how this macroautophagic response can be tol-
erated by the aﬀected cells. the preferential accumulation
of aggregate proteins in the perinuclear area and the
u. bandhyopadhyay, a.m. cuervo / experimental gerontology 42 (2007) 120–128
125
delivery of avs to this particular region do not seem to be
accidental, but instead may confer speciﬁcity to this other
way ‘‘in bulk’’ degradation process (iwata et al., 2005a).
increasing the ratio of aggregate proteins to cytosolic com-
ponents in these regions may guarantee that autophago-
somes preferentially
aggregates without
engulf
disturbing cellular organelles.
the
a second concern on the use of macroautophagy upreg-
ulation as a possible therapeutic for these diseases, was the
fact that rapamycin, the most commonly used agent to
upregulate macroautophagy, acts by inhibition of mtor,
one of the major regulatory cellular kinases. current eﬀorts
have focused on the search for ways to stimulate macro-
autophagy without disturbing mtor. lithium, often used
for the treatment of bi-polar patients, has been shown to
activate macroautophagy in an mtor-independent man-
ner, modulating instead inositolphosphate metabolism
(sarker et al., 2005).
normal macroautophagic activity is also essential for
maintenance of neuronal homeostasis and prevention of
protein aggregation, even in the absence of precipitating
factors such as oxidative damage or presence of a prone-
to-aggregate protein. recently it was shown, using two dif-
ferent conditional knock-out mice for essential autophagic
genes, that the absence of macroautophagy in these ani-
mals led to neurodegeneration (accumulation of polyubiq-
uitinated proteins,
increased rates of apoptosis and
neuronal loss with the concurrent neuronal symptomatolo-
gy) (hara et al., 2006; komatsu et al., 2006).
these observations support that upregulation of macro-
autophagy in neurodegenerative disorders confers a defen-
sive mechanism. hence, the ability to maintain proper
macroautophagic activity, rather than massive upregula-
tion of macroautophagy, should be the therapeutical goal
in these protein conformational disorders.
9. synuclein: helping to put the pieces together
activation of macroautophagy has been described in
diﬀerent neurodegenerative disorders. since the alteration
in the aﬀected protein in many of these disorders is present
since birth, why is macroautophagy activated later on in
life?
recent studies have shown that blockage of the protea-
some with catalytic inhibitors leads to changes in autopha-
gic activity. while acute inhibition results in activation of
macroautophagy (bennett et al., 2005;
iwata et al.,
2005a), chronic moderate inhibition, which probably
resembles more the described eﬀect of the misfolded pro-
teins in the ubiquitin/proteasome system, is associated with
deregulation of macroautophagy (ding et al., 2003). cells
exposed to low concentrations of proteasome inhibitors
for extended periods of time show both, constitutive activa-
tion of macroautophagy and the inability to further upreg-
ulate this process. the molecular components connecting
proteasome blockage to macroautophagy activation, the
role that protein aggregation alone plays in this activation,
as well as, the consequences of macroautophagy deregula-
tion still remain unknown.
those
proteins
once
to
eliminate
the direct inhibitory eﬀect of mutant polyglutamine
proteins on the proteasome (bennett et al., 2005) and the
fact that wild type, and at least the soluble forms of the
mutant protein, can be substrates for this proteolytic sys-
tem (webb et al., 2003), explains the activation of macro-
autophagy
the
proteasome is blocked. however, in the case of parkinson
disease (pd) an extra level of complexity is added, as solu-
ble a-synuclein, the main component of the inclusion
bodies in almost all forms of pd, can be degraded by both
the ubiqutin/proteasome system and by cma (cuervo
et al., 2004). a-synuclein contains in its amino acid
sequence the cma targeting motif recognized by hsc70,
which delivers it to lysosomes. none of the three mutations
described in familial forms of pd aﬀect the cma targeting
motif; thus the mutant proteins are still carried by the
cma chaperone to the lysosomal surface where they inter-
act with the cma lysosomal receptor. however, in con-
trast to the wild type protein that is readily translocated
lumen, mutant a-synucleins remain
into the lysosomal
bound to the cma-translocation complex blocking not
only their own degradation, but also that of the other
cma substrates. although only a small percentage of
pd patients carry mutations in a-synuclein, this is still
the most abundant protein in aggregates. we have recently
found that certain post-translational modiﬁcations of a-
synuclein have a similar eﬀect on its degradation via
cma (martinez-vicente et al., submitted), supporting that
changes in this molecule (formation of oligomeric complex-
es or ﬁbers) block lysosomal translocation. the decreased
degradation of a-synuclein through this pathway could
contribute to increased cytosolic levels of this protein
and, consequently, favor its organization in ﬁbers/oligo-
mers and eventually aggregates. however, of more impor-
tance for cell
that mutant or
modiﬁed a-synucleins block cma (cuervo et al., 2004).
in order to analyze the cellular consequences of impaired
cma activity, we have recently reproduced such blockage
using stable rna interference against the lysosomal recep-
tor (massey et al., 2006). we have found that, because of
the role of cma in the removal of oxidized and altered
proteins during conditions resulting in mild oxidative stress
(kiﬃn et al., 2006), blockage of this pathway results in
increased intracellular levels of oxidized, unfolded and
aggregate proteins. of particular interest is the fact that
cma blockage results in upregulation of macroautophagy
(massey et al., 2006). we have found both, increased for-
mation and clearance of avs even under normal basal con-
ditions. although upregulation of macroautophagy in
these cells helps to maintain normal levels of protein degra-
dation, it cannot compensate for cma as part of the cellu-
lar response to stress. thus, cells with impaired cma are
more susceptible to almost any kind of stressor (massey
et al., 2006). it is interesting, however, that even under
those stress conditions upregulation of macroautophagy
functioning is the fact
126
u. bandhyopadhyay, a.m. cuervo / experimental gerontology 42 (2007) 120–128
is part of the cellular survival response, rather than an
eﬀector of cellular death, because blockage of macroauto-
phagy under these conditions further diminished cell viabil-
ity. as in the case of the cross-talk between the ubiquitin/
proteasome system and macroautophagy, very little is
known about the molecular players that regulate compen-
sation of cma with macroautophagy.
in summary, failure of either of the proteolytic systems
that would normally take care of the degradation of soluble
cytosolic proteins results in upregulation of macroauto-
phagy, which is able to engulf and remove insoluble aggre-
gates and prevents neurodegeneration (fig. 2).
10. proteolytic failure, the ﬁnal stages
it is now well accepted that in the last stages of neurode-
generation, a generalized failure of the diﬀerent proteolytic
systems contributes to activate cellular death mechanisms
(fig. 2). the exact reasons for the failure are still unknown,
but diﬀerent factors could be responsible.
on one hand, as pointed out before, the activity of the
major proteolytic systems decreases with age in almost all
tissues and animal models analyzed (martinez-vicente
et al., 2005). alterations in assembly and disassembly of
the 20s and 26s proteasome, as well as selective damage
of particular subunits of this complex have been described
in old cells (keller et al., 2004). these alterations, added to
the blockage induced by the aggregating proteins in neuro-
degenerative disorders, could lead to complete failure of
this system. similarly, the age-dependent reduction in the
levels of the cma receptor in lysosomes (massey et al.,
2004) could completely block any remaining cma in pd
aﬀected cells. as described before, despite upregulation of
macroautophagy, cma blockage renders cells more sus-
ceptible to a large variety of stressors (massey et al.,
2006). in the compensatory stage, macroautophagy is
responsible for most protein degradation, however this
process is also aﬀected with age (reviewed in cuervo
et al., 2005).
the
could aggravate
in addition to the age-dependent deregulation of macro-
autophagy other factors, intrinsic to protein conformation-
al disorders,
situation. thus,
autophagy-related proteins have been found sequestered
in inclusion bodies in cells overexpressing mutant hunting-
tin, the protein altered in huntington’s disease (iwata
et al., 2005a,b). although these proteins are usually abun-
dant and their levels are not limiting under normal condi-
tions, persistent sequestration into the aggregates could
reduce their levels to a point that aﬀects formation of
avs. in addition, altered vesicular traﬃcking, also a com-
mon feature of these disorders (rubinsztein et al., 2005),
could aﬀect the ability to clear up already formed avs by
preventing their fusion to secondary lysosomes, as well as
by altering delivery of enzymes to lysosomes. likewise,
changes in cholesterol traﬃcking and metabolism, often
described in these disorders, could further alter lysosomal
biogenesis and lysosome to autophagosome fusion.
other not yet explored factors could also contribute to
macroautophagy failure. for example, enhanced formation
of free radicals has been described in diﬀerent neurodegen-
erative disorders as a consequence of poor mitochondria
functioning, accumulation of damaged components in the
cytosol and release of pro-oxidants, such as dopamine,
from leaking synaptic vesicles (betarbet et al., 2005; keller
et al., 2004). acute or persistent oxidative stress has been
shown to aﬀect diﬀerent aspects of lysosomal function:
damage of the lysosomal membrane, leaking of lysosomal
enzymes, altered degradation of engulfed substrates that
eventually become undegradable (lipofuscin) (kiﬃn et al.,
2006; terman and brunk, 2004). the concurrence of all
these factors is likely to contribute to the decline in macro-
autophagic activity. other factors could aﬀect lysosomal
function and macroautophagy even more indirectly. for
example,
function
described in several of those neurodegenerative disorders
likely results in decreased atp levels, thus aﬀecting all
energy-dependent processes including macroautophagy.
in mitochondrial
alterations
the
once macroautophagy is severely aﬀected chances of cell
survival drastically decrease. for one, organelles are poorly
turned over, increasing their chances of getting damaged,
as it also appears to be the case of soluble cytosolic pro-
teins, which end aggregating in the cytosol, increasing the
number of inclusion bodies (kopito, 2000). in addition,
poor clearance of already formed avs results in their accu-
mulation in the cytosol, further contributing to the intra-
cellular traﬃc jam (nixon et al., 2005; rubinsztein et al.,
2005). this persistence of avs has a particularly negative
eﬀect in the case of alzheimer’s disease. a protein cleavage
product, b-amyloid, is considered one of the main compo-
nents in the pathogenesis of this neurodegenerative disor-
der. b-amyloid results
from cleavage of amyloid-
precursor protein by b- and c-secretase enzymes at the plas-
ma membrane, resulting in the extracellular release of the
cleavage product. both the precursor protein and the
enzymes have been detected in avs, but the eﬃcient clear-
ance of these organelles by lysosomes prevents the coexis-
tence of substrate and enzymes long enough to result in
cleavage (yu et al., 2004). however, in ad neurons the
slower clearance of avs increases the enzyme–substrate
interaction time thus generating a new intracellular source
of b-amyloid. combination of oxidative stress with lyso-
somal proteases inhibition prolongs oxidation, cross-link-
ing of autophagocytosed material and dramatically
increases
lipofuscin formation (terman and brunk,
2004). although the exact mechanisms that activate neuro-
nal death are still not clear, combination of mitochondrial
damage,
leakage of cathepsins and likely alteration of
dna due to the accumulation of nuclear aggregates all
contribute to cell death.
11. summary and concluding remarks
in summary, failure of the proteolytic systems that nor-
mally take care of the removal of soluble proteins inside
u. bandhyopadhyay, a.m. cuervo / experimental gerontology 42 (2007) 120–128
127
cells, such as the ubiquitin/proteasome system and cma, is
a common feature of diﬀerent neurodegenerative disorders
and may be key to their pathogenesis. the impaired function
of these systems is often the consequence of direct blockage
by misfolded or altered proteins but, aggravating condi-
tions, such as aging and oxidative stress, precipitate the pro-
teolytic failure. the existence of a cross-talk between
diﬀerent proteolytic systems allows a compensatory stage
in which up regulation of another autophagic pathway such
as macroautophagy guarantees removal of misfolded and
aggregated proteins. however, with time or under stress,
this compensatory mechanism also fails leading to the accu-
mulation of the altered proteins, partially undigested prod-
ucts, and cytosolic vesicles, which alter normal cellular
function. eventually, by still unclear mechanisms, these con-
ditions result in cell death. future eﬀorts should be directed
in preventing the initial failure in the degradation of soluble
proteins and to better understand the intercommunication
among proteolytic systems, thereby enabling manipulations
to enhance and maintain compensatory mechanisms.
acknowledgements
we would like to gratefully acknowledge ashish massey
for critically reviewing this manuscript and the other mem-
bers of our laboratory for their valuable suggestions. re-
search in our
supported by national
institutes of health/national institute of aging grants
ag021904 and ag19834, a huntington’s disease society
of america research grant and an ellison medical foun-
dation award.
laboratory is
references
bennett, e.j., bence, n.f., jayakumar, r., kopito, r.r., 2005. global
impairment of the ubiquitin–proteasome system by nuclear or cyto-
plasmic protein aggregates precedes inclusion body formation. mol.
cell 17, 351–365.
bergamini, e., cavallini, g., donati, a., gori, z., 2004. the role of
macroautophagy in the ageing process, anti-ageing intervention and
age-associated diseases. int. j. biochem. cell biol. 36, 2392–2404.
betarbet, r., sherer, t.b., greenamyre, j.t., 2005. ubiquitin–proteasome
system and parkinson’s diseases. exp. neurol. 191 (suppl 1), s17–s27.
cuervo, a.m., 2004. autophagy: in sickness and in health. trends cell
biol. 14, 70–77.
cuervo, a.m., bergamini, e., brunk, u.t., droge, w., ffrench, m.,
terman, a., 2005. autophagy and aging: the importance of maintain-
ing ‘‘clean’’ cells. autophagy 1, 131–140.
cuervo, a.m., stefanis, l., fredenburg, r., lansbury, p.t., sulzer, d.,
2004. impaired degradation of mutant alpha-synuclein by chaperone-
mediated autophagy. science 305, 1292–1295.
gozuacik, d., kimchi, a., 2004. autophagy as a cell death and tumor
suppressor mechanism. oncogene 23, 2891–2906.
grune, t., jung, t., merker, k., davies, k.j., 2004. decreased proteolysis
caused by protein aggregates, inclusion bodies, plaques, lipofuscin,
ceroid, and ‘aggresomes’ during oxidative stress, aging, and disease.
int. j. biochem. cell biol. 36, 2519–2530.
hara, t., nakamura, k., matsui, m., yamamoto, a., nakahara, y.,
suzuki-migishima, r., yokoyama, m., mishima, k., saito, i.,
okano, h., mizushima, n., 2006. suppression of basal autophagy in
neural cells causes neurodegenerative disease in mice. nature 441,
885–889.
iwata, a., christianson, j.c., bucci, m., ellerby, l.m., nukina, n.,
forno, l.s., kopito, r.r., 2005a. increased susceptibility of cyto-
plasmic over nuclear polyglutamine aggregates to autophagic degra-
dation. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 102, 13135–13140.
iwata, a., riley, b.e., johnston, j.a., kopito, r.r., 2005b. hdac6 and
microtubules are required for autophagic degradation of aggregated
huntingtin. j. biol. chem. 280, 40282–40292.
keller, j.n., dimayuga, e., chen, q., thorpe, j., gee, j., ding, q., 2004.
autophagy, proteasomes, lipofuscin, and oxidative stress in the aging
brain. int. j. biochem. cell biol. 36, 2376–2391.
kiﬃn, r., bandyopadhyay, u., cuervo, a.m., 2006. oxidative stress and
autophagy. antioxid. redox. signal. 8, 152–162.
klionsky, d.j., 2005. the molecular machinery of autophagy: unanswered
questions. j. cell sci. 118, 7–18.
klionsky, d.j., cregg, j.m., dunn jr., w.a., emr, s.d., sakai, y.,
sandoval, i.v., sibirny, a., subramani, s., thumm, m., veenhuis, m.,
ohsumi, y., 2003. a uniﬁed nomenclature for yeast autophagy-related
genes. dev. cell 5, 539–545.
komatsu, m., waguri, s., chiba, t., murata, s., iwata, j., tanida, i.,
ueno, t., koike, m., uchiyama, y., kominami, e., tanaka, k., 2006.
loss of autophagy in the central nervous system causes neurodegen-
eration in mice. nature 441, 880–884.
kondo, y., kanzawa, t., sawaya, r., kondo, s., 2005. the role of
autophagy in cancer development and response to therapy. nat. rev.
cancer 5, 726–734.
kopito, r.r., 2000. aggresomes, inclusion bodies and protein aggrega-
tion. trends cell biol. 10, 524–530.
levine, b., yuan, j., 2005. autophagy in cell death: an innocent convict?
j. clin invest. 115, 2679–2688.
majeski, a., dice, j., 2004. mechanisms of chaperone-mediated autoph-
agy. int. j. biochem. cell biol. 36, 2435–2444.
markossian, k.a., kurganov, b.i., 2004. protein folding, misfolding, and
aggregation. formation of inclusion bodies and aggresomes. bio-
chemistry (mosc) 69, 971–984.
martinez-vicente, m., sovak, g., cuervo, a.m., 2005. protein degrada-
tion and aging. exp. gerontol. 40, 622–633.
massey, a.c., kiﬃn, r., cuervo, a.m., 2004. pathophysiology of
chaperone-mediated autophagy. int. j. biochem. cell biol. 36, 2420–
2434.
massey, a.c., kaushik, s., sovak, g., kiﬃn, r., cuervo, a.m., 2006.
the selective blockage of chaperone-mediated
consequences of
autophagy. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 103, 5805–5810.
mcdonough, h., patterson, c., 2003. chip: a link between the chaperone
and proteasome systems. cell stress chaperones 8, 303–308.
mizushima, n., 2004. methods for monitoring autophagy. int. j.
biochem. cell biol. 36, 2491–2502.
mizushima, n., 2005. the pleiotropic role of autophagy: from protein
debnath, j., baehrecke, e.h., kroemer, g., 2005. does autophagy
metabolism to bactericide. cell death diﬀer. 12, 1535–1541.
contribute to cell death? autophagy 1, 66–74.
ding, q., dimayuga, e., martin, s., bruce-keller, a., nukala, v., cuervo,
a.m., keller, j.k., 2003. characterization of chronic low-level
proteasome inhibition on neural homeostasis. j. neurochem. 86,
489–497.
flood, f., murphy, s., cowburn, r.f., lannfelt, l., walker, b.,
johnston, j.a., 2005. proteasome-mediated eﬀects on amyloid precur-
sor protein processing at the gamma-secretase site. biochem. j. 385,
545–550.
mizushima, n., ohsumi, y., yoshimori, t., 2002. autophagosome
formation in mammalian cells. cell struct. funct. 27, 421–429.
mortimore, g.e., lardeux, b.r., adams, c.e., 1988. regulation of
microautophagy and basal protein turnover in rat liver. eﬀects of
short-term starvation. j. biol. chem. 263, 2506–2512.
nixon, r.a., wegiel, j., kumar, a., yu, w.h., peterhoﬀ, c., cataldo, a.,
cuervo, a.m., 2005. extensive involvement of autophagy in alzheimer
disease: an immuno-electron microscopy study. j. neuropathol. exp.
neurol. 64, 113–122.
128
u. bandhyopadhyay, a.m. cuervo / experimental gerontology 42 (2007) 120–128
ogier-denis, e., codogno, p., 2003. autophagy: a barrier or an
adaptative response to cancer. biochim. biophys. acta 1603, 113–128.
ohsumi, y., mizushima, n., 2004. two ubiquitin-like conjugation systems
essential for autophagy. semin. cell dev. biol. 15, 231–236.
pattingre, s., tassa, a., qu, x., garuti, r., liang, x.h., mizushima, n.,
packer, m., schneider, m.d., levine, b., 2005. bcl-2 antiapoptotic
proteins inhibit beclin 1-dependent autophagy. cell 122, 927–939.
ravikumar, b., vacher, c., berger, z., davies, j.e., luo, s., oroz, l.g.,
scaravilli, f., easton, d.f., duden, r., o’kane, c.j., rubinsztein,
d.c., 2004. inhibition of mtor induces autophagy and reduces
toxicity of polyglutamine expansions in ﬂy and mouse models of
huntington disease. nat. genet. 36, 585–595.
rubinsztein, d.c., difiglia, m., heintz, n., nixon, r.a., qin, z.-h.,
ravikumar, b., stefanis, l., tolkovsky, a.m., 2005. autophagy and
its possible roles in nervous system diseases, damage and repair.
autophagy 1, 11–22.
sarker, s., flot, r.a., berger, z., imarisio, s., cordenier, a., pasco, m.,
cook, l., rubinsztein, d., 2005. lithium induces autophagy by
inhibiting inositol monophosphatase. j. cell biol. 170, 1101–1111.
shin, y., klucken, j., patterson, c., hyman, b.t., mclean, p.j., 2005.
the co-chaperone carboxyl terminus of hsp70-interacting protein
(chip) mediates alpha-synuclein degradation decisions between
proteasomal and lysosomal pathways. j. biol. chem. 280, 23727–
23734.
terman, a., brunk, u.t., 2004. lipofuscin. int. j. biochem. cell biol. 36,
1400–1404.
uttenweiler, a., schwarz, h., mayer, a., 2005. microautophagic vacuole
invagination requires calmodulin in a ca2+-independent function. j.
biol. chem. 280, 33289–33297.
webb, j., ravikumar, b., atkins, j., skepper, j., rubinsztein, d., 2003.
alpha-synuclein is degraded by both autophagy and the proteasome. j.
biol. chem. 278, 25009–25013.
yu, w.h., kumar, a., peterhoﬀ, c., shapiro kulnane, l., uchiyama,
y., lamb, b.t., cuervo, a.m., nixon, r.a., 2004. autophagic
vacuoles are enriched in amyloid precursor protein-secretase activ-
ities:
implications for beta-amyloid peptide over-production and
localization in alzheimer’s disease. int. j. biochem. cell biol. 36,
2531–2540.