biochemical and biophysical research communications 351 (2006) 71–77
bbrc
www.elsevier.com/locate/ybbrc
quantitative monitoring of autophagic degradation
akinori kawai, syuichi takano, nobuhiro nakamura, shoji ohkuma *
division of life sciences, graduate school of natural science and technology, kanazawa university, kakuma, kanazawa, ishikawa 920-1192, japan
received 21 september 2006
available online 12 october 2006
abstract
we developed a quantitative method for analyzing the induction of autophagy using a cho-k1 cell line stably expressing a green
ﬂuorescent protein (gfp) in mitochondrial matrix (mtgfp-cho). when mtgfp-cho cells were incubated with a medium depleted
of amino acids and serum, the gfp ﬂuorescence was decreased concomitant with degradation of the protein. biochemical and morpho-
logical analyses strongly suggested the degradation of mtgfp was mediated by bulk and non-selective degradation of mitochondria by
autophagy. quantitative measurement of the mtgfp degradation was performed by measuring the gfp ﬂuorescence and dna content
by a ﬂuorometric method and calculating the relative gfp intensity of dna content, which approximated mean gfp ﬂuorescence per
cell. using this method, we showed for the ﬁrst time that diﬀerent inducers, such as amino acids and serum starvation or rapamycin
treatment, promote autophagy with diﬀerent kinetics. this method is easy, relatively quick, and may be easily adapted to high through-
put screening for novel drugs that enhance or inhibit autophagy, and also for genes that regulate or modulate autophagy.
ó 2006 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.
keywords: macroautophagy; starvation; kinetics; gfp; mitochondrial degradation
macroautophagy, usually referred to simply as autoph-
agy, is an intracellular bulk degradation system that is
induced when cells are forced to restructure their compo-
nents or correct redundancies under nutrient starvation,
hormonal stimulation or cell diﬀerentiation, and develop-
ment (for reviews, see [1–6]). when cells are starved, they
induce autophagy, degrade, and reuse non-essential parts
of the components to enable energy production and mate-
rial supplies, such as amino acids, for maintaining the
essential cellular functions required for survival
[2]. in
autophagy, double membrane structures, known as limit-
ing membranes, are formed de novo in the cytoplasm,
which enclose and capture a portion of the cytoplasm
including organelles, such as mitochondria, to form auto-
phagosomes. the autophagosomes then fuse with endo-
somes or lysosomes that contain degradative enzymes
and become autolysosomes, commencing the degradation
of their contents [4]. it has been thought that the degrada-
* corresponding author. fax: +81 76 234 4462.
e-mail address: ohkuma@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp (s. ohkuma).
0006-291x/$ - see front matter ó 2006 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.09.168
tion by autophagy is non-selective and that constitutive
basal level autophagy accounts for the turnover of long-
lived proteins [2,3,7]. however, growing evidence indicates
that autophagy can also participate in selective degradation
of cytoplasmic materials including protein aggregates,
impaired mitochondria, peroxisomes, and even invading
pathogens (for reviews, see [5,8,9]).
autophagy has been traced by biochemical and mor-
phological methods (reviewed in [10]). generally, biochem-
ical methods are quantitative but rather time-consuming
and it is inherently diﬃcult to distinguish autophagy from
other intracellular degradation pathways, such as the ubiq-
uitin-proteasome pathway and microautophagy [8,11,12].
on the other hand, morphological methods are simple,
and less time-consuming, although they are rather qualita-
tive and have diﬃculty in quantitation. using gfp fused
lc3, a mammalian atg8 orthologue, the formation of
autophagosomes in mammalian cells can be monitored in
live, enabling morphological quantitation [13,14]. howev-
er, as lc3 dissociates from autophagosomes after fusion
with lytic compartments [13,14], precise quantitation of
autophagosome formation or induction of autophagy is
72
a. kawai et al. / biochemical and biophysical research communications 351 (2006) 71–77
not possible. furthermore, morphological methods are dif-
ﬁcult to apply for high throughput screening. under these
circumstances, we attempted to establish an alternative
quantitative monitoring system for autophagy. we have
chosen mitochondria as a marker because mitochondria
are a well-established and easily traceable cytoplasmic
component in autophagic degradation [1,3,15]. in addition,
as mitochondria are large organelles and are thought to be
degraded mainly by macroautophagy [15,16], they are able
to serve as a speciﬁc marker for macroautophagy.
materials and methods
reagents. chloroquine diphosphate, ammonium chloride, baﬁlomycin
a1, leupeptin, pepstatin, and rapamycin were purchased from wako fine
chemicals (osaka, japan). 3-methyladenine, protease inhibitor cocktail,
and lactacystin were purchased from sigma–aldrich corp. (st. louis,
mo, usa). cycloheximide and dmso were purchased from nacalai
tesque (kyoto, japan). anti-ubiquitin antibody and chymostatin were
purchased from calbiochem (san diego, ca, usa). antipain was pur-
chased from bachem ag (bubendorf, switzerland).
cell line and culture conditions. cho-k1 cells (a chinese hamster
ovary cell line) were maintained in ham’s f-12 medium (gibco-brl)
supplemented with 10% fbs (growth medium) containing 100 u/ml
penicillin and 100 lg/ml streptomycin at 37 °c under 5% co2. medium
depleted of serum was ham’s f-12 medium without supplements. amino
acids depleted medium was formulated with the recipe of ham’s f-12
medium without amino acids.
transfection and production of a stable cell line. pcaggs-gfp (gfp
expressing in the cytoplasm) and pcaggs-potc-gfp (mtgfp) were
kindly donated by dr. masataka mori (kumamoto university, japan).
pgfp-lc3 was kindly donated from dr. tamotsu yoshimori (osaka
university, japan). cho-k1 cells were transfected with the plasmids
using eﬀectene (qiagen, hilden, germany). stable transfectants were
selected and maintained with growth medium containing 100 u/ml peni-
cillin, 100 lg/ml streptomycin, and 500 lg/ml g418 (sigma–aldrich).
starvation. 2 · 105 cells were seeded in a 6-cm dish and cultured with
growth medium containing 100 u/ml penicillin, 100 lg/ml streptomycin,
and 500 lg/ml g418 for 48 h. cells were washed twice with experimental
medium and cultured in the same medium for the indicated time. where
indicated, 100 lm chloroquine diphosphate, 40 mm ammonium chloride,
10 mm 3-methyladenine, 100 nm baﬁlomycin a1 (with 0.01% dmso),
100 nm rapamycin (with 0.01% dmso), 10 lm lactacystin (with 0.1%
dmso) or 0.1% dmso was added to the medium.
fluorescent microscopy. for labeling lysosomes, mtgfp-cho cells
were pre-incubated with a growth medium containing antibiotics and
500 lg/ml of texas red dextran (molecular probes, eugene, or, usa)
for 16 h. cells were incubated with a growth medium or starvation
mediums containing protease inhibitors (pepstatin, leupeptin, antipain,
and chymostatin) for the indicated time at 37 °c, washed 3· with phos-
phate-buﬀered saline (pbs), and ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde. cells were
observed under a laser scanning confocal microscope (lsm510, carl
zeiss, jena, germany). for quantitation, average ﬂuorescent intensities of
the cells were measured by imagej (nih, usa). a cell area was manually
enclosed using freehand line selection and the mean intensity then mea-
sured. for each image, 20 cells were randomly selected and the mean
calculated. this was then subtracted from the mean background obtained
by the measurement of three randomly selected areas with no cells in the
same image.
fluorometric analysis. this was performed as described previously with
slight modiﬁcations [17]. brieﬂy, cells were washed and lysed with sds-
containing buﬀer and sonicated. gfp ﬂuorescence was measured using a
ﬂuorometer (f-4500, hitachi, tokyo, japan) at 480 nm for excitation and
510 nm for emission. the dna content was measured using hoechst
33258 dye [18].
western blotting. mtgfp-cho cells were washed with pbs and lysed
in lysis buﬀer (0.1 m tris–hcl [ph 6.7], 4% sds). the lysate was soni-
cated (soniﬁer 250d, branson, danbury, ct, usa) and protein con-
centration was determined by bca protein assay kit (pierce chemical
company, rockford, mi, usa). this was then adjusted to 0.1 m dtt,
0.2 m sucrose, and 0.02% bpb, and analyzed by sds polyacrylamide gels
electrophoresis (15% or 12.5% polyacrylamide gels). proteins were then
electrophoretically transferred to polyvinylidene diﬂuoride membrane
(immobilon, millipore corp., bedford, ma, usa) using semi-dry transfer
blotter. the membranes were then incubated with the rabbit anti-gfp
polyclonal antibody (santa cruz biotechnology, ca, usa), mouse anti-
actin monoclonal antibody (chemicon international, ca, usa), rabbit
anti-ubiquitin polyclonal antibody (calbiochem) or rabbit anti-lc3
antibody (kindly donated by dr. tamotsu yoshimori, osaka university),
and then anti-rabbit or anti-mouse secondary antibody conjugated to
horseradish peroxidase (1:5000) (santa cruz). the reaction was visualized
using the ecl detection system (amersham pharmacia biotech, uppsala,
sweden) with a luminescence analyzer (las-1000, fuji film corp.,
tokyo, japan). densitometry was performed with image gauge (fuji
film corp.).
results and discussion
monitoring the degradation of mitochondrial matrix marker
protein (mtgfp)
to monitor mitochondrial degradation, cho-k1 cells
stably expressing a green ﬂuorescent protein (gfp) in
mitochondrial matrix (mtgfp-cho) were produced using
a gfp fused with a pre-sequence of mitochondrial orni-
thine transcarbamylase (mtgfp)
[19]. when mtgfp-
cho cells were examined for the localization of gfp
under a ﬂuorescent microscope, cytoplasmic dots or
thread-like structures,
typical of mitochondria, were
observed (fig. 1a, right panel). these structures were pre-
cisely co-stained with mitotracker red cmxros (invitro-
gen), which speciﬁcally and vitally stains mitochondria,
(unpublished observation) indicating that the mtgfp was
properly targeted to mitochondria and suitable for further
analyses.
first, we tried amino acid starvation, which has been
widely used to induce autophagy in cultured cells [13,20].
when mtgfp-cho cells were treated with a medium
depleted of serum and amino acids for 12 h, ﬁxed, and
observed under a confocal microscope, the ﬂuorescence
of the mitochondria was signiﬁcantly lower than the con-
trol cells, although the structure and distribution of
mitochondria was not signiﬁcantly aﬀected (fig. 1a).
the average intensity of ﬂuorescence per cells was
reduced to about 60% (fig. 1b). western blotting analy-
sis was performed to conﬁrm that the reduction was
caused by the degradation of mtgfp. as expected, star-
vation apparently reduced the amount of mtgfp
(fig. 1c). the reduction was about 80% when quantiﬁed
by densitometry (fig. 1d). this result indicated that the
reduction in the gfp ﬂuorescence was mostly caused by
degradation of the protein. however, the rate of ﬂuores-
cence reduction was signiﬁcantly higher compared to that
of the protein amount. this may be caused by quenching
of gfp ﬂuorescence preceding degradation, or more
a. kawai et al. / biochemical and biophysical research communications 351 (2006) 71–77
73
30
25
20
15
10
starvation time(h)
12
starvation time (h)
12
120
100
80
60
40
20
100
90
80
70
60
50
starvation time (h)
mtgfp(starvation)
gfp(starvation)
mtgfp(normal)
gfp(normal)
12
24
36
time (h)
fig. 1. degradation of mtgfp after amino acid and serum starvation. (a) mtgfp-cho cells were cultured in normal growth medium (left panel) or
medium depleted of amino acids and serum (right panel) for 12 h and examined by a confocal microscope. a sliced image with the largest cytoplasmic area
is shown. bar = 20 lm. (b) the average ﬂuorescent intensity in a cell was quantiﬁed as described in materials and methods. the result shown is an average
of three independent experiments. error bars indicate sem. (c) mtgfp-cho cells were treated as in (a) and lysates were prepared, and analyzed by
western blotting using anti-gfp antibody as described in materials and methods. the same amount of protein (30 lg) was loaded into each lane. a
representative picture of three experiments is shown. (d) the bands in (c) were densitometrically quantiﬁed and the ratio of the starved cell sample to the
control was calculated. the result shown is an average of three independent experiments. error bars indicate sem. (e) cells were incubated with normal
growth medium (normal) or starvation medium (starvation) for the indicated time, harvested, and lysed. the gfp ﬂuorescence and the dna content of
the samples were analyzed using a ﬂuorometer as described in materials and methods. the ﬂuorescent intensity of gfp per dna content was calculated
and expressed as the ratio to the non-treated control cell sample. mtgfp, mtgfp-cho; gfp, cho expressing gfp in the cytoplasm.
likely, by limitations in the morphological quantitation
method.
to evaluate these possibilities and furthermore develop
a simpler, less time-consuming, and quantitative method,
we employed ﬂuorometry developed in our laboratory pre-
viously [17]. cells were incubated with normal growth
medium or starvation medium for 1–36 h and the ﬂuores-
cent intensity of gfp per dna content, which approxi-
mated mean gfp ﬂuorescence per cells, was analyzed.
the ﬂuorescence was unchanged after incubation with con-
trol normal medium for up to 36 h (fig. 1e, mtgfp, nor-
mal). in contrast, starvation induced a gradual reduction in
gfp ﬂuorescence (fig. 1e, mtgfp, starvation). the ratio
of the reduction after 12 h starvation was about 80% and
this was in good accordance with the level of mtgfp deg-
radation determined by western blotting (figs. 1c and d).
therefore, we concluded that the degradation of gfp
simultaneously proceeded with the quenching of the ﬂuo-
rescence so that the loss of ﬂuorescence reﬂects the degra-
dation of protein. intriguingly, gfp ﬂuorescence was
almost unchanged for the ﬁrst one to two hours of starva-
tion. the ﬂuorescence was then dramatically reduced after
3 h of starvation (less than 90% was left). as the induction
of autophagy has been reported to peak after 2 h of starva-
tion [13], it is probable that the latency in the reduction in
mtgfp ﬂuorescence reﬂected the time required for the for-
mation of autolysosomes. a steady reduction in gfp ﬂuo-
rescence was observed with longer incubation, indicating
the continuous degradation of mtgfp by starvation.
mitophagy, the speciﬁc degradation of mitochondria by
autophagy, was reported to be induced by mitochondrial
damage [21–25]. thus, we tried to evaluate whether mtgfp
was degraded speciﬁcally or non-speciﬁcally by the classical
bulk degradation mechanism of autophagy [26]. for this
purpose, we generated cho cells stably expressing gfp
in the cytoplasm and quantiﬁed the reduction in the gfp
ﬂuorescence by the same ﬂuorometric method. as shown
in fig. 1e, the kinetics of the decrease in ﬂuorescence were
almost the same as for mtgfp, strongly suggesting that the
degradation of mtgfp was mediated by a bulk degrada-
tion mechanism by autophagy under amino acid and serum
starvation. as the degradation of mtgfp was thought to
be coincident with the disruption of mitochondria in auto-
lysosomes (further discussed in the next section) and more
speciﬁcally to reﬂect macroautophagy, only mtgfp-cho
was analyzed hereafter.
74
a. kawai et al. / biochemical and biophysical research communications 351 (2006) 71–77
mtgfp is degraded by autophagy
we took several approaches to conﬁrm that the degra-
dation of mtgfp was caused by autophagy and not by
another cytoplasmic degradation mechanism, such as the
ubiquitin-proteasome system.
first, we carried out a morphological analysis to look
for evidence of autophagic degradation of mitochondria.
if mitochondria are enclosed in autophagosomes and fused
with the lysosomal compartment, co-localization of lyso-
somes and mitochondria has to be observed. to label lyso-
somes, mtgfp-cho cells were loaded with texas red
dextran as described in materials and methods. the cells
were then starved and the distribution of mitochondria
and lysosomes analyzed by confocal microscopy. to better
preserve the autophagocytosed mitochondria, cells were
treated with protease inhibitors. when control cells were
analyzed, the distribution of mitochondria and lysosomes
was clearly distinct and virtually no co-localization was
observed (fig. 2a, top panels). in contrast, apparent close
apposition of mitochondria and lysosomes was observed
after 6 h of starvation (fig. 2a, bottom panels and b, yel-
low spots). careful inspection of the cells, by reconstruct-
ing 3d images of the cells, revealed actual overlapping of
mitochondria and lysosomes suggesting the engulfment of
mitochondria in autolysosomes (figs. 2b and c). in most
of the cells, one or two of these structures were observed.
the low number of these structures may reﬂect rapid
breakdown of mitochondrial
integrity and dispersal of
mtgfp in autolysosomes and/or partial degradation of
mtgfp that was not completely inhibited by added prote-
ase inhibitors. in any case, the observation of mitochondria
in lysosomes suggests that the mitochondria are auto-
phagocytosed and delivered to autolysosomes.
second, we tested whether compounds that
inhibit
autophagy aﬀect the degradation of mtgfp. chloroquine
diphosphate and ammonium chloride are basic compounds
that have been reported to raise the ph in an acidic com-
partment [27]. baﬁlomycin a1 is a selective inhibitor of
v-atpase and also raises the ph in an acidic compartment
[28]. these compounds have been shown to inhibit the for-
mation of autolysosomes, probably by inhibiting the fusion
fig. 2. co-localization of mitochondria with lysosomes in starved cells. mtgfp-cho cells were loaded with texas red dextran and then incubated in
normal growth medium (a, top panels) or medium depleted of amino acids and serum (a, bottom panels, b and c) for 6 h in the presence of protease
inhibitors. cells were ﬁxed and observed using a confocal microscope. (a) a sliced image with the largest cytoplasmic area is shown. left panels, mtgfp;
center panels, texas red dextran; right panels, merged pictures. bar = 10 lm. (b) left gallery; representative sliced images with clear co-localization of
mitochondria with lysosomes. panels are in the same arrangement as in (a). bar = 10 lm. (c) areas marked by white squares in merged pictures of (b)
were enlarged and presented with sliced images of the z-axis of the corresponding areas. top, x–z images; bottom left, x–y images; bottom right, y–z
images. green, blue, and red lines in the panels indicate the planes for x–z, x–y, and y–z images. bar = 2 lm.
a. kawai et al. / biochemical and biophysical research communications 351 (2006) 71–77
75
table 1
eﬀect of autophagy inhibitors on mtgfp degradation
the rate of inhibition (%) (n = 3)
chloroquine
ammonium chloride
baﬁlomycin a1
3-methyladenine
40.0 ± 4.0
47.1 ± 6.7
49.3 ± 7.8
53.2 ± 4.8
mtgfp-cho cells were cultured in a medium deprived of amino acids and
serum in the presence of the indicated inhibitors for 6 h. the cell lysates
were ﬂuorometrically analyzed as described in fig. 1.
between autophagosomes and lysosomes [29,30]. 3-methy-
ladenine is an inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase
(pi3k), which speciﬁcally inhibits macroautophagy [31].
when mtgfp-cho cells were incubated with amino acid-
and serum-free starvation medium for 6 h in the presence
of any of these compounds, the degradation of mtgfp
was inhibited by 40–50% (table 1). these results suggest
that the degradation of mtgfp is mediated by autophagy.
third, the induction of autophagy was conﬁrmed bio-
chemically. lc3 is a mammalian orthologue of yeast atg8p
and known to be converted to a higher mobility isoform
and localized on newly formed autophagosomes
in
response to the induction of autophagy [13]. incubation
of mtgfp-cho cells in amino acid and serum depleted
medium strongly induced the conversion of lc3-i to a fast-
er migrating lc3-ii isoform (unpublished observation and
fig. 3a) suggesting the eﬃcient induction of autophagy in
our experimental system.
finally, we investigated the involvement of the protea-
somal degradation system in mtgfp degradation. the
inhibition of proteasomes can be monitored by accumula-
tion of ubiquitinated proteins, which is detected as smear
bands with lower mobility, by western blotting of a cell
lysate with anti-ubiquitin antibody [32]. mtgfp-cho cells
were incubated with starvation medium in the presence or
absence of lactacystin, a proteasome inhibitor [33], lysed,
and analyzed using anti-ubiquitin antibody (fig. 3b).
there was no signiﬁcant accumulation of ubiquitinated
proteins in mock treated starved cells (fig. 3b, dmso).
in striking contrast, massive accumulation of ubiquitinated
proteins was detected in lactacystin treated starved cells
clearly indicating inhibition of the proteasomal degrada-
tion system (fig. 3b, lact). in contrast, accumulation of
lc3-ii was not aﬀected, indicating that inhibition of the
proteasomal degradation system did not interfere with
the induction of autophagy (fig. 3a, compare dmso
and lact). under these conditions, no signiﬁcant inhibition
of the degradation of mtgfp was observed (fig. 3c).
therefore, the proteasomal degradation system appears
not to be involved in the degradation of mtgfp.
taken together, these results strongly suggested that in
our experimental system the degradation of mtgfp was
mostly caused by autophagy, probably by bulk engulfment
of mitochondria in autophagosomes and consecutive for-
mation of autolysosomes.
fig. 3. eﬀect of proteasome inhibitors on mtgfp degradation. mtgfp-
cho cells were cultured in normal growth medium or medium depleted of
amino acids and serum-containing lactacystin (lact) or mock carrier
solvent
lysates were subjected to
immunoblotting analysis using an antibody against lc3 and actin (a)
or ubiquitin (b). (c) gfp ﬂuorescence of the cell lysates was measured as
in fig. 1e.
(a,b) the cell
(dmso)
for 6 h.
kinetic analysis of autophagy
the ﬂuorometric assay was relatively easy and less time-
consuming and was well suited for the kinetic analysis of
autophagy. using this method, detailed quantitative mea-
surement of autophagic activity is possible. to start, we
challenged the cells with several diﬀerent conditions that
have been shown to induce autophagy and analyzed the
kinetics of autophagic induction. we compared rapamycin
treatment and amino acid or serum starvation, which have
all been shown to induce autophagy but by activation of
diﬀerent points in the autophagic signal
transduction
machinery (see reviews for [5,34]). as mentioned in
fig. 1e, dramatic induction of autophagic degradation
was observed under double depletion of amino acids and
serum after 3 h of treatment. in contrast, depletion of only
amino acids or only serum showed only weaker induction
of autophagic degradation at
the same time point
(fig. 4a). the continuous and gradual induction kinetics
were very similar for sole depletion of amino acids or
76
a. kawai et al. / biochemical and biophysical research communications 351 (2006) 71–77
100
90
80
70
starvation (a.a.+serum)
starvation (serum)
starvation (a.a.)
normal
rapamycin
12
time (h)
normal
starvation
(a.a.+serum)
starvation
(serum)
starvation
(a.a.)
100nm
rapamycin
3hr
6hr
12hr
fig. 4. kinetic analysis of autophagy induction by diﬀerent autophagic inducers. (a) mtgfp-cho cells were cultured with normal growth medium with
rapamycin or medium depleted of amino acids, serum or both for the indicated time. gfp ﬂuorescence of the cell lysates was measured as in fig. 1e. (b)
cho cells expressing lc3-gfp were treated as in (a). the cells were ﬁxed and examined by confocal laser scanning microscopy. bar = 10 lm.
serum (fig. 4a). interestingly, the induction of autophagic
degradation by rapamycin was further slower compared to
the depletion of amino acids, serum or both. signiﬁcant
induction was only observable after 12 h of treatment
(fig. 4a).
to conﬁrm that the kinetic diﬀerence was actually
reﬂecting that of autophagy induction, we morphologically
analyzed the kinetics of the activation of autophagy by
lc3 activation, gfp-tagged lc3 rapidly accumulates on
cytoplasmic spots during the early stage of autophagosome
formation [10,14]. a cho cell line stably expressing lc3-
gfp was produced and treated with rapamycin or was
starved of amino acids or serum (fig. 4b). amino acid
and serum starvation strongly induced the accumulation
of lc3-gfp on numerous cytoplasmic spots after 3 h of
treatment (fig. 4b). the induction of lc3-gfp dots
remained at a similar level after 6 h of treatment and slight-
ly decreased after 12 h. this correlated well with the induc-
tion of autophagic degradation (fig. 4a). as expected, the
number of lc3-gfp dots was lower with the sole starva-
tion of amino acids or serum after 3 h of treatment and
remained at a similar
incubation
(fig. 4b). the induction of lc3 dots was even lower under
rapamycin treatment after 3 and 6 h, and then signiﬁcantly
increased after 12 h of treatment. these results were in
good agreement with the kinetic analysis (fig. 4b) and
level with longer
strongly support the idea that the kinetics of mtgfp deg-
radation reﬂects the kinetics of autophagy induction.
to our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study to demonstrate
that diﬀerent inducers promote autophagy with diﬀerent
kinetics. these kinetic diﬀerences may reﬂect the diﬀerent
steps of the autophagic signal transduction pathway that
rapamycin and amino acid or serum starvation stimulate
[5,34,35].
we conclude that mtgfp serves as a quantitative mark-
er to analyze the kinetics of autophagy induction. the
quantitative method we have developed would be easily
adapted to high-throughput screening for novel drugs that
enhance or inhibit autophagy, as well as for genes that reg-
ulate or modulate autophagy. future application of this
analytical method will greatly beneﬁt the understanding
of autophagy and development of new drugs and treat-
ments of autophagy-related disorders,
including cancer
[36–38].
acknowledgments
we thank drs. t. yoshimori (osaka university) and m.
mori (kumamoto, university) for kindly providing re-
agents, ms. h. uchiyama for her help in imaging analysis,
mr. t. sakaguchi and ms. k. suzuki for experimental sup-
ports, and all the members of the ohkuma lab. for helpful
a. kawai et al. / biochemical and biophysical research communications 351 (2006) 71–77
77
comments and discussion. this work was supported by a
grant-in-aid for scientiﬁc research from the ministry of
education, culture, sports, science and technology of
japan.
references
[1] h. glaumann, j.l. ericsson, l. marzella, mechanisms of intralys-
osomal degradation with special reference to autophagocytosis and
heterophagocytosis of cell organelles, int. rev. cytol. 73 (1981) 149–
182.
[2] g.e. mortimore, a.r. poso, intracellular protein catabolism and its
control during nutrient deprivation and supply, annu. rev. nutr. 7
(1987) 539–564.
[3] w.a. dunn jr., autophagy and related mechanisms of lysosome-
mediated protein degradation, trends cell biol. 4 (1994) 139–143.
[4] d.j. klionsky, y. ohsumi, vacuolar import of proteins and organ-
elles from the cytoplasm, annu. rev. cell dev. biol. 15 (1999) 1–32.
[5] a.j. meijer, p. codogno, regulation and role of autophagy in
mammalian cells, int. j. biochem. cell biol. 36 (2004) 2445–2462.
[6] f. reggiori, d.j. klionsky, autophagosomes: biogenesis from
scratch? curr. opin. cell biol. 17 (2005) 415–422.
[7] p.o. seglen, p. bohley, autophagy and other vacuolar protein
degradation mechanisms, experientia 48 (1992) 158–172.
[8] j. kim, d.j. klionsky, autophagy, cytoplasm-to-vacuole targeting
pathway, and pexophagy in yeast and mammalian cells, annu. rev.
biochem. 69 (2000) 303–342.
[9] m. ogawa, c. sasakawa, bacterial evasion of the autophagic defense
system, curr. opin. microbiol. 9 (2006) 62–68.
[10] n. mizushima, methods for monitoring autophagy, int. j. biochem.
cell biol. 36 (2004) 2491–2502.
[11] m. hochstrasser, ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation, annu.
rev. genet. 30 (1996) 405–439.
[12] a. hershko, a. ciechanover, the ubiquitin system, annu. rev.
biochem. 67 (1998) 425–479.
[13] y. kabeya, n. mizushima, t. ueno, a. yamamoto, t. kirisako, t.
noda, e. kominami, y. ohsumi, t. yoshimori, lc3, a mammalian
homologue of yeast apg8p, is localized in autophagosome mem-
branes after processing, embo j. 19 (2000) 5720–5728.
[14] n. mizushima, a. yamamoto, m. matsui, t. yoshimori, y. ohsumi,
in vivo analysis of autophagy in response to nutrient starvation using
transgenic mice expressing a ﬂuorescent autophagosome marker,
mol. biol. cell. 15 (2004) 1101–1111.
[15] c. de duve, r. wattiaux, functions of lysosomes, annu. rev.
physiol. 28 (1966) 435–492.
[16] e. holtzman iii, turnover of organelles and intracellular macro-
molecules in eukaryotes, in: m. alfert, w. beermann, g. rudkin, w.
sandritter, p. sitte (eds.), lysosomes: a survey, springer werlag,
wien, new york, 1976, pp. 129–152.
[17] k. arai, s. ohkuma, t. matsukawa, s. kato, a simple estimation of
peroxisomal degradation with green ﬂuorescent protein—an applica-
tion for cell cycle analysis, febs lett. 507 (2001) 181–186.
[18] c. labarca, k. paigen, a simple, rapid, and sensitive dna assay
procedure, anal. biochem. 102 (1980) 344–352.
[19] m. yano, m. kanazawa, k. terada, c. namchai, m. yamaizumi, b.
hanson, n. hoogenraad, m. mori, visualization of mitochondrial
protein import in cultured mammalian cells with green ﬂuorescent
protein and eﬀects of overexpression of the human import receptor
tom20, j. biol. chem. 272 (1997) 8459–8465.
[20] d.b. munafo, m.i. colombo, induction of autophagy causes
dramatic changes in the subcellular distribution of gfp-rab24,
traﬃc 3 (2002) 472–482.
[21] l. xue, g.c. fletcher, a.m. tolkovsky, mitochondria are selectively
eliminated from eukaryotic cells after blockade of caspases during
apoptosis, curr. biol. 11 (2001) 361–365.
[22] s.p. elmore, t. qian, s.f. grissom, j.j. lemasters, the mitochon-
drial permeability transition initiates autophagy in rat hepatocytes,
faseb j. 15 (2001) 2286–2287.
[23] i. kissova, m. deﬃeu, s. manon, n. camougrand, uth1p is involved
in the autophagic degradation of mitochondria, j. biol. chem. 279
(2004) 39068–39074.
[24] m. priault, b. salin, j. schaeﬀer, f.m. vallette, j.p. di rago, j.c.
martinou, impairing the bioenergetic status and the biogenesis of
mitochondria triggers mitophagy in yeast, cell death diﬀer. 12
(2005) 1613–1621.
[25] s. rodriguez-enriquez, i. kim, r.t. currin, j.j. lemasters, tracker
dyes to probe mitochondrial autophagy (mitophagy) in rat hepato-
cytes, autophagy 2 (2006) 39–46.
[26] j. kopitz, g.o. kisen, p.b. gordon, p. bohley, p.o. seglen,
nonselective autophagy of cytosolic enzymes by isolated rat hepato-
cytes, j. cell biol. 111 (1990) 941–953.
[27] s. ohkuma, b. poole, fluorescence probe measurement of the
intralysosomal ph in living cells and the perturbation of ph
by various agents, proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 75 (1978)
3327–3331.
[28] t. yoshimori, a. yamamoto, y. moriyama, m. futai, y. tashiro,
baﬁlomycin a1, a speciﬁc inhibitor of vacuolar-type h(+)-atpase,
inhibits acidiﬁcation and protein degradation in lysosomes of cultured
cells, j. biol. chem. 266 (1991) 17707–17712.
[29] a. yamamoto, y. tagawa, t. yoshimori, y. moriyama, r. masaki,
y. tashiro, baﬁlomycin a1 prevents maturation of autophagic
vacuoles by inhibiting fusion between autophagosomes and lysosomes
in rat hepatoma cell line, h-4-ii-e cells, cell struct. funct. 23 (1998)
33–42.
[30] p. boya, r.a. gonzalez-polo, n. casares, j.l. perfettini, p. dessen,
n. larochette, d. metivier, d. meley, s. souquere, t. yoshimori, g.
pierron, p. codogno, g. kroemer, inhibition of macroautophagy
triggers apoptosis, mol. cell biol. 25 (2005) 1025–1040.
[31] p.o. seglen, p.b. gordon, 3-methyladenine: speciﬁc inhibitor of
autophagic/lysosomal protein degradation in isolated rat hepatocytes,
proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 79 (1982) 1889–1892.
[32] e.g. mimnaugh, p. bonvini, l. neckers, the measurement of
ubiquitin and ubiquitinated proteins, electrophoresis 20 (1999) 418–
428.
[33] d.h. lee, a.l. goldberg, proteasome inhibitors: valuable new tools
for cell biologists, trends cell biol. 8 (1998) 397–403.
[34] d.a. van sluijters, p.f. dubbelhuis, e.f. blommaart, a.j. meijer,
amino-acid-dependent signal transduction, biochem. j. 351 (pt 3)
(2000) 545–550.
[35] g.e. mortimore, m. kadowaki, autophagy:
its mechanism and
in: a.j. ciechanover, a.l. schwartz (eds.), cellular
regulation,
proteolytic systems, wiley liss, new york, 1994, pp. 65–87.
[36] t. schmelzle, m.n. hall, tor, a central controller of cell growth,
cell 103 (2000) 253–262.
[37] j.j. lum, d.e. bauer, m. kong, m.h. harris, c. li, t. lindsten,
c.b. thompson, growth factor regulation of autophagy and cell
survival in the absence of apoptosis, cell 120 (2005) 237–248.
[38] g. kroemer, m. jaattela, lysosomes and autophagy in cell death
control, nat. rev. cancer 5 (2005) 886–897.