current biology 17, 1–11, january 9, 2007 ª2007 elsevier ltd all rights reserved doi 10.1016/j.cub.2006.10.053
article
direct induction of autophagy
by atg1 inhibits cell growth
and induces apoptotic cell death
ryan c. scott,1 ga´ bor juha´ sz,1
and thomas p. neufeld1,*
1 department of genetics,
cell biology, and development
university of minnesota
minneapolis, minnesota 55455
summary
background: to survive starvation and other forms of
stress, eukaryotic cells undergo a lysosomal process
of cytoplasmic degradation known as autophagy. au-
tophagy has been implicated in a number of cellular
and developmental processes,
including cell-growth
control and programmed cell death. however, direct ev-
idence of a causal role for autophagy in these processes
is lacking, resulting in part from the pleiotropic effects
of signaling molecules such as tor that regulate auto-
phagy. here, we circumvent this difﬁculty by directly
manipulating autophagy rates in drosophila through
the autophagy-speciﬁc protein kinase atg1.
results: we ﬁnd that overexpression of atg1 is sufﬁcient
to induce high levels of autophagy, the ﬁrst such demon-
stration among wild-type atg proteins. in contrast to
ﬁndings in yeast, induction of autophagy by atg1 is de-
pendent on its kinase activity. we ﬁnd that cells with
high levels of atg1-induced autophagy are rapidly elimi-
nated, demonstrating that autophagy is capable of in-
ducing cell death. however, this cell death is caspase
dependent and displays dna fragmentation, suggesting
that autophagy represents an alternative induction of ap-
optosis, rather than a distinct form of cell death. in addi-
tion, we demonstrate that atg1-induced autophagy
strongly inhibits cell growth and that atg1 mutant cells
have a relative growth advantage under conditions of
reduced tor signaling. finally, we show that atg1 ex-
pression results in negative feedback on the activity of
tor itself.
conclusions: our results reveal a central role for atg1 in
mounting a coordinated autophagic response and dem-
onstrate that autophagy has the capacity to induce cell
death. furthermore, this work identiﬁes autophagy as
a critical mechanism by which inhibition of tor signal-
ing leads to reduced cell growth.
introduction
under starvation conditions, eukaryotic cells recover nu-
trients via autophagy, a lysosome-mediated process of
bulk cytoplasmic degradation. through autophagy, long-
lived proteins, organelles, and other components of the
cytoplasm are nonselectively engulfed within special-
ized double-membraned vesicles known as autophago-
somes. subsequent fusion of the outer autophagosomal
*correspondence: neufeld@ahc.umn.edu
membrane with the lysosome results in a structure
known as the autolysosome, in which the inner mem-
brane and its cytoplasmic cargo are degraded. break-
down products released from the autolysosome supply
the cell with an internal source of nutrients that can sup-
port essential metabolic processes during starvation [1].
approximately 20 atg (autophagy-related) genes spe-
ciﬁcally required for autophagy have been discovered
in saccharomyces cerevisiae [2–4], and many of these
genes have functional homologs in metazoans [1, 5].
in addition to survival of starvation, autophagy has
been implicated in many aspects of health and develop-
ment, including aging, programmed cell death, patho-
genic infection, stress responses, neurodegenerative
and muscle disorders, cellular remodeling, cancer, and
cell growth [1, 6]. as in many of these processes, evi-
dence for a role of autophagy in cell-growth control is
largely correlative. autophagy is promoted by several
tumor suppressor genes including pten, tsc1 and 2,
and beclin 1, and it is inhibited by growth-promoting
pathways such as type i pi3k and target of rapamycin
(tor) signaling [5, 7–10]. a variety of conditions that
stimulate cell growth, such as growth factor addition,
partial hepatectomy, and refeeding after starvation,
also inhibit autophagy, while growth-suppressive sig-
nals, such as contact inhibition and substrate detach-
ment, induce autophagy [11]. together, these correlative
ﬁndings are consistent with a model in which the cata-
bolic effects of autophagy act as a brake on cell growth
during development. however, this issue is complicated
by the pleiotropic nature of the signaling pathways that
regulate autophagy. for example, in addition to inhibit-
ing autophagy, the tor pathway controls cell metabo-
lism and biosynthesis by promoting ribosome biogene-
sis, protein synthesis, and nutrient uptake [12]. the
relevant contribution of each of these downstream effec-
tor pathways to net cell growth is poorly understood.
autophagy is also known to be involved in pro-
grammed cell death and distinguishes type ii (autopha-
gic) from type i (apoptotic) cell death. autophagic cell
death is characterized by an abundance of autophago-
somes and autolysosomes in the dying cell and differs
from apoptotic cell death in that dying cells are degraded
by their own lysosomal enzymes, rather than by phago-
cytosis [13]. it has been difﬁcult, however, to establish
whether autophagy plays a causal role in type ii cell
death or represents a failed attempt at cell survival in
cells undergoing programmed cell death. death signals
often induce features of both apoptosis and autophagy,
and mutations that disrupt autophagy have been shown
to suppress cell death in some cases [14–16] and hasten
it in others [2, 17]. thus, as in the case for cell growth,
much of the support for a direct role for autophagy in
cell death rests on correlative evidence.
one approach to addressing the potential role of au-
tophagy in functions such as cell death and growth
would be to induce autophagy directly, independent of
the signaling pathways that normally control it. in yeast,
current biology
multiple signaling pathways, including tor, ampk, and
ras/pka, converge on the ser-thr kinase atg1 to regu-
late autophagy [18–20]. in addition, atg1 interacts with
multiple components of
the autophagic machinery,
through direct association, through phosphorylation,
and/or through effects on intracellular localization [18,
21, 22]. thus, atg1 may represent a nodal point for con-
trolling multiple steps in the autophagic process in
response to various inductive cues.
interestingly, the role of atg1 kinase activity in yeast is
the subject of some debate, and studies from different
groups that used atp analog-sensitive and kinase-
defective atg1 mutants have reached conﬂicting conclu-
sions. one study reported that atg1 kinase activity is
required for the autophagy-related biosynthetic cyto-
plasm to vacuole targeting (cvt) pathway but not for au-
tophagy, and concluded that atg1 plays a structural role
in autophagy [23]. however, other studies with similar
reagents found a requirement for atg1 kinase activity in
both cvt and autophagy [18, 24].
we have previously shown that the drosophila mela-
nogaster homolog of atg1 is required for autophagy in
the larval fat body, an organ analogous to the vertebrate
liver with roles in nutrient storage and mobilization [5].
here, we investigate the effects of drosophila atg1
loss of function and overexpression on autophagy in-
duction, cell-growth control, and cell death. our ﬁndings
indicate that atg1 expression is sufﬁcient to effect a full
autophagic response, resulting in a marked inhibition of
cell growth and a rapid induction of apoptotic cell death.
results
overexpression of atg1 induces autophagy
null mutation of atg1 results in a severe block of starva-
tion-induced autophagy and leads to fully penetrant le-
thality by the late pupal stage [5]. to test the effects of
atg1 overexpression, we generated multiple transgenic
lines expressing wild-type atg1 under gal4/uas con-
trol. we also used an independently generated line
(gs10797), in which uas regulatory sequences have
been inserted upstream of the endogenous atg1 gene.
in control experiments, weak expression of uas-atg1
was sufﬁcient to partially rescue atg1 null mutants to
adult viability (34% of expected progeny; see figure s1a
in the supplemental data available online) and partially
rescued the autophagy defect of these mutants, as mea-
sured by lysotracker red staining, an effective marker
of autolysosomes in fat body tissue [5, 25]. similar to
wild-type larvae, atg1 mutants rescued by uas-atg1
showed no lysotracker staining when fed normally (fig-
ures s1b and s1g) but regained some capability to in-
duce autophagy under starvation conditions (figures
s1c and s1g).
to address whether atg1 overexpression is sufﬁcient
to induce autophagy in fed animals, we expressed high
levels of transgenic atg1 via the heat shock-inducible
hsp70-gal4 driver. ultrastructural analysis showed
that heat shock alone does not increase the abundance
of autophagic structures in fat body cells of normally fed
larvae (figure 1a). in contrast, heat shock-induced over-
expression of atg1 resulted in the formation of autopha-
gosomes and autolysosomes throughout fat body cells
of fed animals (figure 1b). these autophagic structures
were indistinguishable from those generated by starva-
tion [5], with readily identiﬁable cytoplasmic compo-
nents in various stages of degradation. robust induc-
tion of autophagy in response to heat shock-induced
atg1 overexpression was also evident by lysotracker
staining in live fat body tissue from fed larvae (compare
figures 1c and 1d; figure 1i). punctate lysotracker
staining was also observed in response to constitutive
expression of atg1 throughout the fat body (see below),
in fat body cell clones (figure s1e), and in eye and wing
imaginal disc cells (data not shown). in addition, we oc-
casionally observed localization of autolysosomes to
the perinuclear region by tem and lysotracker staining
(figures s1e and s3g and data not shown). this is con-
sistent with recent observations that mammalian atg9,
a potential marker of the membrane source of autopha-
gosomes, is recruited from the perinuclear trans-golgi
network in response to starvation in an atg1-dependent
manner [26]. accumulation of atg1-induced autolyso-
somes in the perinuclear region may therefore represent
an early site of autolysosome formation.
to determine whether autophagy induced by atg1
overexpression utilizes the same molecular compo-
nents as starvation-induced autophagy, we ﬁrst exam-
ined the localization of gfp-atg8a and gfp-atg8b, spe-
ciﬁc markers of the autophagosomal membrane [5, 27,
28]. as previously described, gfp-atg8b was distrib-
uted uniformly in control fat body cells from fed animals
(figure 1e). in contrast, heat shock-induced overexpres-
sion of atg1 resulted in redistribution of gfp-atg8b to a
punctate pattern (figure 1f), similar to the effects of
starvation [5]. in costaining experiments, gfp-atg8-la-
beled punctae were often observed adjacent to or over-
lapping with lysotracker-positive spots (figure 1g), as
previously observed in starved wild-type animals [5]. ex-
pression of atg1 in the developing retinal cells behind
the morphogenetic furrow of the eye imaginal disc with
gmr-gal4 also resulted in punctate localization of
gfp-atg8a in normally fed animals, as compared to
control cells ahead of the furrow (figure s2c). interest-
ingly, atg1 overexpression also led to a marked increase
in abundance of gfp-atg8a and gfp-atg8b in both eye
and wing imaginal discs. in these experiments, atg1 was
overexpressed in the posterior region of eye or wing
discs with gmr-gal4 or en-gal4, respectively, caus-
ing increased levels of hsp70-driven gfp-atg8 relative
to the anterior regions of these discs (compare figures
s2a and s2b, and data not shown). an increase in
gfp-atg8b levels was also observed in atg1-overex-
pressing eye and wing discs by immunoblot analysis
(figure s2e and data not shown). gfp-atg8 expression
is regulated by heterologous promoter and utr se-
quences in these lines [5], and atg1 overexpression
did not affect the abundance of gfp alone nor of a con-
trol gfp fusion (data not shown), so we conclude that
atg1 has a posttranslational effect on gfp-atg8 levels,
perhaps through stabilization of gfp-atg8 protein.
thus, atg8 levels are increased under autophagy-induc-
ing conditions, both transcriptionally [27, 29] (g.j., l.g.
puska´ s, o. komonyi, b. e´ rdi, p. maro´ y, t.p.n., and m.
sass, unpublished data) and posttranscriptionally.
to further explore the requirement for known compo-
nents of the autophagic machinery, we tested whether
mutations in other atg genes affect the ability of atg1
atg1-induced autophagy inhibits growth and survival
figure 1. overexpression of atg1 induces autophagy
(a–g) induction of autophagy by heat shock-induced overexpres-
sion of atg1. tem showing no induction of autophagy in the fat
body of normally fed animals by heat shock alone (a), whereas
heat shock-induced overexpression of atg1 (b) results in the accu-
mulation of autolysosomes (arrows) and autophagosomes (arrow-
heads). heat shock alone shows no lysotracker staining (c), while
heat shock-induced atg1 overexpression results in punctate lyso-
tracker staining (red) (d). induction of atg1 overexpression leads
to a redistribution of gfp-atg8b (green) from uniform staining (e)
to a punctate pattern (f). many gfp-atg8-positive punctae are
found either adjacent to (small arrowheads) or overlapping with
(large arrowheads) lysotracker-labeled structures (g). n indicates
the nucleus in (a); l indicates a lipid droplet in (a) and (b).
(h) mutation of atg8a disrupts atg1-induced lysotracker staining.
(i) quantitation of lysotracker staining. single asterisk indicates a
signiﬁcant difference from wild-type: p < 0.0001; double asterisk
overexpression to induce autophagy. we identiﬁed a p
element insertion in the coding region of atg8a and gen-
erated a deletion in the atg3 locus, previously shown to
be required for autophagy in drosophila through rnai
analysis [30]. each of these mutations caused a signiﬁ-
cant decrease in starvation-induced autophagy (com-
pare figure s3a to s3b and s3e; figure s3k), which
could be rescued by transgenic expression of the re-
spective wild-type gene (figure s3c, s3f, and s3k)
and by excision of the p insertion from atg8a (figures
s3d and s3k). importantly, each mutation also caused
a signiﬁcant inhibition of atg1-induced autophagy (fig-
ures 1h and 1i; figures s3g, s3h, and s3k). together,
these results indicate that atg1 is both necessary and
sufﬁcient to induce a complete autophagic response
and that atg1-induced autophagy engages at least
some of the same molecular machinery as starvation-in-
duced autophagy.
atg1-dependent autophagy restricts cell growth
inhibition of autophagy is strongly correlated with the
cell-growth effects of tor signaling, suggesting that
as a catabolic process, autophagy may inhibit growth.
to determine whether the increased level of autophagy
in tor pathway mutants contributes to their reduced
rate of cell growth, we ﬁrst examined the growth proper-
ties of mitotic clones in the wing imaginal disc. we found
that clones of cells with a null mutation in pdk1, a posi-
tive regulator of the tor pathway [12], were reduced in
size by 78% as compared with their wild-type twin spot
(figures 2a and 2e). clones doubly mutant for pdk1 and
atg1 showed no signiﬁcant difference in size from pdk1
mutant clones (figures 2b and 2e), indicating that while
loss of pdk1 induces autophagy [5], this does not con-
tribute signiﬁcantly to the reduced growth rate of pdk1
null mutant cells. this result is consistent with our previ-
ous ﬁnding that rnai-mediated inhibition of autophagy
does not alleviate the growth defect of tor null mutant
cells [5].
we reasoned that the severe block to tor signaling
in pdk1 and tor null mutants may lead to metabolic
changes that mask the potential growth effects of au-
tophagy. for example, the reduction of nutrient import
in tor null mutant cells [31] may engender a requirement
for nutrients generated by autophagy, and thus the po-
tential growth-suppressive effects of autophagy may
be balanced or outweighed by its metabolic beneﬁts un-
der these severe conditions. to test the potential growth
effects of autophagy under conditions of more moder-
ately reduced tor signaling, we treated larvae with
a concentration of rapamycin that causes a 2-fold delay
in larval development. in normally fed animals, the size
of atg1 null mutant clones did not differ signiﬁcantly
from their twin spot controls (figures 2c and 2e). in
indicates a signiﬁcant difference from atg1 overexpression alone:
p = 0.0001. error bars indicate standard deviation (sd).
scale bars represent 1 mm in (a) and (b) and 10 mm in (c)–(h). nuclei
are marked in blue in (c)–(h).
genotypes: (a, c) hsp70-gal4/+. (b, d) hsp70-gal4/uas-atg19.
(e) hsp70-gfp-atg8b6b/hsp70-gfp-atg8b6b; hsp70-gal4/tm6b.
(f, g) hsp70-gfp-atg8b6b/hsp70-gfp-atg8b6b; hsp70-gal4/
uas-atg16b. (h) atg8akg07569/y; hsp70-gal4/uas-atg16b. (i) as
in (c), (d), and (h).
current biology
figure 2. atg1 expression leads to reduced cell size
(a–d) growth effects of atg1 loss of function in wing disc clones.
pdk1 mutant clones (loss of gfp) display decreased clone size rel-
ative to the wild-type twin spot (increased gfp) (a). simultaneous
loss of atg1 (b) fails to rescue this reduction in size. atg1 mutant
clones do not display a growth phenotype when grown on normal
medium (c), but growth on medium containing 2 mm rapamycin
gives the atg1 mutant clones a relative growth advantage over
wild-type (d).
(e) quantitation of relative clone size in wing discs. mean clone size
normalized to wild-type twin spot within the same image. dotted line
indicates a 1:1 ratio (no growth phenotype). double dagger indicates
no signiﬁcant difference from pdk1 mutant clones: p = 0.44; single
dagger indicates an insigniﬁcant difference from wild-type twin
spot: p = 0.28; asterisk indicates a signiﬁcant difference from wild-
type twin spot: p = 0.016. n indicates clone number.
(f–h) cell size effects of atg1 in the fat body. clonal loss of atg1
function (loss of gfp, arrowheads) has no effect on fat body cell
size in normally fed animals (f), but results in a relative growth ad-
vantage in animals starved of all nutrients for 45 hr (g). clonal over-
expression of atg1 (gfp-positive cells, arrowhead) (h) results in a
marked reduction in cell size. actin cytoskeleton (red) is labeled
with phalloidin (f and g) or a-spectrin antibody (h); nuclei are
marked in blue. dna channel in (h) shows two representative confo-
cal sections. insets show phalloidin (or a-spectrin) channels of
respective images.
(i) quantitation of relative cell size in fat body. mean cell size normal-
ized to wild-type (homozygous and heterozygous) cells within the
same image. wild-type column includes cells from both fed and
starved animals. dagger indicates no signiﬁcant difference from
wild-type: p = 0.54; asterisk indicates a signiﬁcant difference from
wild-type: p < 0.0001. n indicates cell number.
scale bars represent 10 mm. error bars indicate sd.
genotypes: (a) hsﬂp/+; pdk15 frt80b/ubi-gfp frt80b. (b) hsﬂp/+;
pdk15 atg1d3d frt80b/ubi-gfp frt80b. (c, d) hsﬂp/+; atg1d3d
frt80b/ubi-gfp frt80b.
(f, g) hsﬂp/+;
(e) as in (a)–(d).
contrast, addition of rapamycin to the media gave atg1
mutant clones a signiﬁcant growth advantage over
wild-type cells, resulting in a 59% larger average clone
size compared to the wild-type twin spot (figures 2d
and 2e).
to test the growth functions of autophagy under more
physiological conditions, we examined the effects of
starvation on the relative size of wild-type and atg1 mu-
tant cells in the larval fat body. we found that, as in wing
discs, atg1 mutant cells did not show a signiﬁcant differ-
ence in size relative to neighboring wild-type cells in nor-
mally fed animals (figures 2f and 2i), consistent with
the low rates of autophagy observed under these condi-
tions. prolonged starvation, however, gave atg1 mutant
cells a 2.3-fold growth advantage over their wild-type
neighbors (figures 2g and 2i). similar results were ob-
served in cells expressing an rnai construct targeting
atg5 (data not shown). we conclude that under physio-
logical conditions that reduce tor signaling, induction
of autophagy is partially responsible for the observed re-
duced rates of cell growth. these results are consistent
with recent ﬁndings that autophagy is required for star-
vation-induced size reduction of mouse embryonic ﬁ-
broblasts, via a tetracycline-regulated atg5 expression
system [32].
as a complement to these genetic loss-of-function
studies, we tested the growth effects of autophagy in-
duced by uas-atg1 expression. clonal overexpression
of atg1 caused a striking inhibition of fat body cell
growth, resulting in a 94% decrease in cell area (figures
2h and 2i). a corresponding decrease in nuclear size and
dna content was also observed in atg1-expressing cells
(figure 2h; see also below), indicating that high levels of
autophagy inhibit the endoreplicative cell cycle of these
cells. constitutive expression of atg1 throughout the fat
body, or in the eye or wing imaginal disc, also resulted in
a marked reduction in size of these organs (see below,
figure s2g, and data not shown). together, these results
indicate that autophagy is necessary for normal growth
inhibition in response to reduced tor signaling and is
sufﬁcient to inhibit cell growth independent of upstream
signaling.
high levels of autophagy lead
to apoptotic cell death
autophagy and cell death are correlated in a number of
contexts, but the causal relationships are unclear. to
test the potential role of autophagy in promoting cell
death, we induced clones of gfp-marked wing imaginal
disc cells overexpressing atg1 and assayed the per-
centage of gfp-positive cells at successive intervals af-
ter induction. although this approach does not monitor
individual cells in real time, it allowed us to make strong
inferences about their survival by assaying large num-
bers of cells across multiple time points. we found
that, in contrast to control cells expressing gfp alone,
most cells overexpressing atg1 were eliminated within
36 hr of induction (figures 3a–3c). reduced cell num-
bers were noticeable by 12 hr after induction, the earliest
time point at which we could identify gfp expression.
cg-gal4/+; atg1d3d frt80b/uas-2x egfp frt80b. (h) hsﬂp/+;
act>cd2>gal4 uas-gfp/uas-atg16b. (i) as in (f)–(h).
atg1-induced autophagy inhibits growth and survival
figure 3. overexpression of atg1 leads to cell elimination
(a–c) elimination of atg1-overexpressing clones in the wing disc.
wild-type controls show consistent numbers of gfp-positive cells
at 12, 24, 36, 48, and 60 hr after induction by heat shock (a). cells
overexpressing atg1 (gfp-positive cells) are abundant 12 hr after
heat shock, but are eliminated over time (b). mean numbers of
gfp-positive cells, expressed as a percentage of total cells (c). as-
terisk indicates a signiﬁcant difference from the wild-type control:
p < 0.0001.
(d) mutation of atg8a delays elimination of atg1-overexpressing
cells. mean numbers of gfp-positive cells are expressed as a per-
centage of total cells. double asterisk indicates a signiﬁcant differ-
ence from atg1 overexpression alone: p < 0.03.
scale bars represent 10 mm. nuclei are marked in blue. error bars
indicate sd.
genotypes: (a) hsﬂp/+; act>cd2>gal4 uas-gfp/+. (b) hsﬂp/+;
act>cd2>gal4 uas-gfp/uas-atg16b. (c) as in (a) and (b). (d)
atg1: hsﬂp/y; tub>cd2>gal4/+; uas-atg16b/+. atg1 atg8a-: hsﬂp
atg8akg07569/y; tub>cd2>gal4/+; uas-atg16b/+.
elimination of atg1-overexpressing cells was signiﬁ-
cantly reduced in an atg8a mutant background (fig-
ure 3d), suggesting that cell death resulted directly
from increased autophagy.
cells undergoing autophagic cell death have been ob-
served to display signs of apoptosis [33, 34]. we there-
fore examined atg1-overexpressing cells for caspase
activity and dna fragmentation, hallmark features of
apoptotic cells. we found that 20% of wing disc cells
clonally overexpressing atg1 displayed caspase activa-
tion, as shown by active caspase-3 antibody staining
(figure 4a). similarly, terminal uridine nick end labeling
(tunel) revealed dna fragmentation in 22% of atg1-
overexpressing cells (figure 4b). consistent with these
observations, coexpression of the caspase inhibitor
p35 was sufﬁcient to delay the death of atg1-overex-
pressing cells, although these cells were also eventually
eliminated (figure 4c). similar effects on caspase-3 ac-
tivation and tunel staining were observed in fat body
cells clonally overexpressing atg1 (figures 4d and 4e).
we also observed that atg1 overexpression resulted in
reduced or absent ﬁlamentous actin staining at the pe-
riphery of these cells and that they often became frag-
mented and/or engulfed by neighboring wild-type cells
(figures 4f and 4g).
constitutive expression of atg1 throughout the fat
body (see figure 5c) also resulted in substantial apopto-
sis (13% positive for caspase activation, 17% for tunel;
figure s3i), and this cell death was reduced by 94% in
atg3 mutants (p < 0.0001; figure s3j). tunel and active
caspase-3 staining resulting from clonal atg1 overex-
pression were also reduced by 33% and 35%, respec-
tively, in atg8a mutants, consistent with their partial
reduction in atg1-induced lysotracker staining (see fig-
ure 1h) and elimination (see figure 3d). these results
indicate that the apoptosis observed in atg1-overex-
pressing cells is due to high levels of autophagy.
the reduced eye size resulting from atg1 overexpres-
sion (compare figures s2f and s2g) also appears to be
due in part to apoptosis, because coexpression of the
caspase inhibitors diap1 or p35 resulted in a partial sup-
pression of this phenotype (figure s2h and data not
shown). finally, we found that atg1 overexpression me-
diated by gmr-gal4 led to a decrease in adult viability
and that this was suppressed by coexpression of p35 or
diap1 (figure s2d).
together, these results indicate that constitutive over-
expression of atg1 leads to a form of cell death that is
both caspase and autophagy dependent, with features
typical of apoptosis, such as dna and cytoskeletal frag-
mentation. we therefore conclude that, in addition to
promoting cell survival, autophagy has the capacity to
promote cell death when induced to high levels.
atg1-dependent phenotypes are modulated
by the tor pathway
in yeast, suppression of autophagy by tor signaling is
transduced to the core atg machinery in part through
regulation of the assembly and activity of a multiprotein
complex containing atg1, atg13, and atg17. under
growth-promoting conditions, tor-dependent hyper-
phosphorylation of atg13 reduces its afﬁnity for atg1,
resulting in dissociation of atg13 from the complex
and decreased kinase activity of atg1. upon tor inacti-
vation, dephosphorylation of atg13 increases its afﬁnity
for atg1, leading to increased atg1 kinase activity and
induction of autophagy [18]. whether these aspects of
atg1 regulation by tor signaling are conserved in
higher eukaryotes is unclear, because homologs of
atg13 or atg17 have not been identiﬁed in animals.
to investigate the connection between tor and atg1
in drosophila, we tested whether increased tor activity
affected the ability of atg1 overexpression to induce au-
tophagy. as described above, heat shock-driven over-
expression of atg1 led to induction of autophagy in the
fat body of normally fed larvae (figures 5a and 5e). how-
ever, we found that in animals mutant for tsc2 (a nega-
tive regulator of tor), induction of autophagy by heat
current biology
figure 4. atg1 overexpression induces apoptosis
(a) wing discs display active caspase 3 staining (arrowheads) in
20% (615%, p = 0.007) of cells overexpressing atg1 (gfp-positive
cells).
(b) wing discs show dna fragmentation in 22% (66%, p = 0.0002) of
atg1-overexpressing cells (gfp-positive cells) by tunel staining
(arrowheads).
(c) coexpression of p35 reduces elimination of atg1-overexpressing
cells. mean numbers of gfp-positive cells are expressed as a per-
centage of total cells. double asterisk indicates a signiﬁcant differ-
ence from atg1 overexpression alone: p < 0.020; dagger indicates
no signiﬁcant difference from the wild-type control: p = 0.63.
(d–g) fat body cells overexpressing atg1 die by apoptosis.
(d) an atg1-overexpressing cell (arrowhead) staining for active cas-
pase 3.
(e) atg1-overexpressing cells (arrowheads) staining positive for
tunel. tunel and dna channels show two representative confo-
cal sections.
shock-induced atg1 overexpression was signiﬁcantly
reduced (figures 5b and 5e). similarly, induction of
autophagy and inhibition of cell growth by constitutive
expression of atg1 throughout the fat body (figure 5c)
was strongly suppressed by coexpression of the small
gtpase rheb, an upstream activator of tor signaling
(figure 5d). overexpression of rheb also signiﬁcantly
delayed the elimination of wing disc cells caused by
atg1 overexpression (figure 5f). these results are con-
sistent with the idea that tor signaling in drosophila
may inhibit atg1 activity as in yeast, although they do
not rule out parallel, opposing inputs to autophagy by
atg1 and tor.
atg1 negatively feeds back on tor signaling
although studies in yeast indicate that atg1 is directly
associated with multiple components of the autophagic
machinery, the effects of atg1 overexpression on cell
growth and autophagy in drosophila could in principle
be indirect, for example through modulation of signaling
pathways that regulate autophagy, such as pi3k and
tor. to address this possibility, we examined the effect
of atg1 overexpression on cellular and biochemical
markers of pi3k and tor activity. the intracellular local-
ization of the transcription factor foxo serves as an
in vivo readout of pi3k activity, because it resides in the
nucleus under conditions of low pi3k activity and reloc-
alizes to the cytoplasm in response to pi3k-dependent
phosphorylation by akt [35]. foxo itself has also been
shown to induce autophagy (g.j., l.g. puska´ s, o. komo-
nyi, b. e´ rdi, p. maro´ y, t.p.n., and m. sass, unpublished
data). however, we found that foxo localization was
unchanged by overexpression of atg1 in fat body cells
(figure 6a), indicating that overexpression of atg1 does
not
induce autophagy by affecting pi3k signaling
upstream of akt.
as a measure of tor activity, we examined the effect
of atg1 overexpression on s6k phosphorylation. tor
speciﬁcally phosphorylates drosophila s6k at thr398,
homologous to thr389 of s6k1 in mammals [12]. west-
ern blot analysis showed that while total s6k levels in-
creased slightly in fat body from larvae overexpressing
atg1, phosphorylation of s6k at thr398 was strongly
reduced (figure 6e). rheb overexpression increased
the level of s6k phosphorylation as expected and re-
stored s6k phosphorylation when co-overexpressed
with atg1. these results suggest that atg1 overexpres-
sion leads to a downregulation of tor activity. while
this effect alone could, in theory, account for the effect
of atg1 overexpression on autophagy and cell size, sev-
eral observations suggest that this is not the case. tor
mutant fat body cells show constitutive autophagy [5]
(f) atg1-overexpressing cells with aberrant actin staining (large ar-
rowhead) or that have fragmented and been absorbed into neigh-
boring cells (small arrowheads).
(g) a cell overexpressing atg1 (arrowhead) has lost most peripheral
actin staining and has been completely engulfed by a neighboring
fat body cell.
scale bars represent 10 mm. nuclei are marked in blue. error bars
indicate sd.
genotypes: (a, b, d–g) hsﬂp/+; act>cd2>gal4 uas-gfp/uas-
atg16b.
(c) control: hsﬂp/+; act>cd2>gal4 uas-gfp/+. atg1:
hsﬂp/+; act>cd2>gal4 uas-gfp/uas-atg16b. atg1 p35: hsﬂp/+;
act>cd2>gal4 uas-gfp/uas-atg16b uas-p35.
atg1-induced autophagy inhibits growth and survival
figure 5. regulation of atg1 by tor signaling
(a–d) atg1-induced autophagy is suppressed by activation of the
tor pathway. heat shock-induced overexpression of atg1 (a) in-
duces autophagy as shown by lysotracker staining (red), but muta-
tion of tsc2 inhibits this induction (b). overexpression of rheb
rescues atg1-overexpression phenotypes. overexpression of atg1
throughout the fat body (c) results in variable reduction in cell size
and induction of autophagy. simultaneous overexpression of rheb
(d) rescues these effects.
(e) quantitation of lysotracker staining. double asterisk indicates
a signiﬁcant difference from atg1 overexpression alone: p = 0.0051.
(f) coexpression of rheb delays elimination of atg1-overexpressing
cells. mean numbers of gfp-positive cells are expressed as a per-
centage of total cells. double asterisk indicates a signiﬁcant differ-
ence from atg1 overexpression alone: p < 0.002.
scale bars represent 10 mm. nuclei are marked in blue. error bars in-
dicate sd.
genotypes: (a) hsp70-gal4/uas-atg16b. (b) hsp70-gal4 gig192/
uas-atg16b gig109.
(d) cg-
gal4/+; uas-atg1gs10797/uas-rhebep50.084-loxp. (e) as in (a) and
(f) atg1: hsﬂp/+; act>cd2>gal4/uas-atg16b. atg1 rheb:
(b).
hsﬂp/+; act>cd2>gal4/uas-atg16b uas-rhebav4.
(c) cg-gal4/+; uas-atg1gs10797/+.
figure 6. feedback by atg1 on tor
(a) atg1 overexpression (gfp-positive cell) does not cause foxo
(red) to localize to the nucleus (arrowhead). inset shows foxo chan-
nel.
(b) tor null cells (loss of gfp, arrowheads) are 70% smaller than sur-
rounding wild-type cells; p < 0.0001. inset shows phalloidin channel.
(c and d) overexpression of atg1 in a tor mutant background. in tor
null animals, cells overexpressing atg1 (gfp-positive cells) show in-
creased lysotracker staining (c) and a 58% reduction in size (d); p =
0.0003. dna channel in (d) shows three representative confocal sec-
tions. inset in (c) shows lysotracker channel with clonal boundaries
outlines in yellow. inset in (d) shows phalloidin channel; arrowheads
indicate atg1-overexpressing cells.
(e) western blot showing a decrease in s6k phosphorylation in fat
body from larvae overexpressing atg1, but not from animals overex-
pressing both atg1 and rheb.
(f) inhibitory feedback by atg1.
scale bars represent 10 mm. nuclei are marked in blue.
genotypes: (a) hsﬂp/+; act>cd2>gal4 uas-gfp/uas-atg16b. (b)
hsﬂp; tordp frt40a/uas-2x egfp frt40a fb-gal4. (c) hsﬂp;
tordp/tordp; act>cd2>gal4 uas-gfp uas-atg1gs10797/+.
(d)
hsﬂp; tordp/tordp; act>cd2>gal4 uas-gfp/uas-atg16b. (e) con-
trol: hsp70-gal4/+. atg1: hsp70-gal4/uas-atg16b. rheb: hsp70-
gal4/uas-rhebep50.084-loxp. atg1 rheb: hsp70-gal4/uas-atg16b
uas-rhebep50.084-loxp.
and are reduced in size (figure 6b). however, we found
that overexpression of atg1 in tor null mutant animals
led to a further increase in autophagy (figure 6c) and
a further decrease in cell size (figure 6d), indicating
that these effects are largely independent of tor. more-
over, the growth reduction of atg1-overexpressing cells
is signiﬁcantly more severe than that of tor null mutant
cells (94% versus 70%; p < 0.0001; compare figures
2h and 6b), further indicating that the size reduction in
atg1-expressing cells is at least partially tor indepen-
dent. thus, downregulation of tor activity by atg1
overexpression does not fully account for its effects on
autophagy and cell size. rather, these data are best de-
scribed by a model whereby atg1 overexpression nega-
tively feeds back on tor (figure 6f), leading to a further
activation of autophagy and reduced cell growth.
the kinase domain of atg1 is essential for induction
of autophagy
as described above, it is unclear whether the kinase
activity of atg1 is required for proper induction of au-
tophagy in yeast. to address this issue, we generated
current biology
a kinase-negative mutant of drosophila atg1 (atg1k38q)
through site-directed mutagenesis of lysine 38, in the
atp binding site of the kinase domain. this residue is ho-
mologous to lysine 54 of yeast atg1, which has been
shown to be required for normal kinase activity [18].
we found that expression of atg1k38q did not lead to
increased autophagy in the fat body of normally fed an-
imals (figure 7a), nor was it able to rescue the autoph-
agy defect in atg1 null mutants (figures s1d and s1g).
consistent with these results, clonal expression of
atg1k38q in the wing imaginal disc did not result in cell
elimination, caspase activation, or dna fragmentation
(figure 7f and data not shown), unlike wild-type atg1.
interestingly, we found that expression of atg1k38q
was sufﬁcient to inhibit starvation- or rapamycin-in-
duced autophagy when expressed in clones (figure 7b
and figure s1f) or throughout the fat body (compare
figures 7c and 7d; figure 7e), suggesting that kinase-
defective atg1 interferes with the function of wild-type
atg1, acting as a dominant-negative mutant. similarly,
expression of atg1k38q in the eye partially rescued the
lethality and reduced adult eye size caused by atg1
overexpression, but had no effect on eye morphology
when expressed alone (figures s2d, s2i, and s2j, re-
spectively).
expression of atg1k38q was not completely without
effect, however. we observed that it leads to a partial re-
duction in tor activity (figure 7g), as well as a modest
decrease in cell size (see figures 7a and 7b). these ﬁnd-
ings imply an as yet undetermined function of atg1 that
does not rely on its kinase activity. indeed, the fact that
atg1k38q was able to rescue a low percentage of atg1
mutant ﬂies to adulthood (figure s1a)
implies that
atg1 has a kinase-independent function outside regula-
tion of autophagy. we therefore conclude that while
atg1 appears to have undetermined kinase-indepen-
dent function, the kinase activity of atg1 is essential
for its ability to promote autophagy in drosophila.
discussion
regulation of autophagy by atg1
delivery of cytoplasmic components to the lysosome
through autophagy involves multiple distinct steps in-
cluding nucleation, expansion and closure of the auto-
phagosome, and its subsequent fusion with the lyso-
some. these membrane-trafﬁcking events require the
recruitment and subsequent retrieval of a large number
of autophagy-speciﬁc atg proteins, as well as general
factors involved in vesicle trafﬁcking. given this com-
plexity, the ﬁnding that overexpression of a single atg
protein is sufﬁcient to accomplish all essential steps in
this process is striking. autophagy occurs constitutively
at a basal rate in most eukaryotic cells [6], so accelera-
tion of a single rate-limiting step by overexpression of
atg1 may be sufﬁcient to increase the overall rate of au-
tophagy. alternatively, the interaction of atg1 with mul-
tiple atg proteins suggests that atg1 may function at
multiple steps in the autophagic process. identiﬁcation
of the relevant in vivo substrates of atg1 will help to clar-
ify this issue. a recent yeast proteomic microarray study
identiﬁed a number of in vitro substrates of atg1, includ-
ing atg8 and atg18, which function in autophagosomal
expansion and retrieval of components of
the
figure 7. induction of autophagy requires atg1 kinase activity
(a–d) expression of kinase-defective atg1 inhibits autophagy.
atg1k38q expression has no effect on autophagy in fed animals (a)
but cell autonomously inhibits induction of autophagy in the fat
body of starved animals (b). tissue-wide induction of autophagy
by starvation (c) is inhibited by expression of kinase inactive atg1
(d). insets show the lysotracker channel of the respective images,
with clonal boundaries outlined in yellow.
(e) quantitation of lysotracker staining. asterisk indicates a signiﬁ-
cant difference from wild-type: p < 0.0001.
(f) wing disc cells overexpressing kinase-defective atg1 are not
eliminated. mean numbers of gfp-positive cells are expressed as
a percentage of total cells. dagger indicates no signiﬁcant difference
from the wild-type control: p > 0.1.
(g) kinase-defective atg1 leads to a modest reduction in tor sig-
naling. nonconsecutive lanes are shown from the same western
blot.
scale bars represent 10 mm. nuclei are marked in blue. error bars
indicate sd.
genotypes:
(a, b) hsﬂp/+; act>cd2>gal4 uas-gfp/uas-
atg1kq13a. (c) cg-gal4/+. (d) cg-gal4/+; uas-atg1kq13a/+. (e)
as in (c) and (d). (f) control: hsﬂp/+; act>cd2>gal4 uas-gfp/+.
atg1k38q: hsﬂp/+; act>cd2>gal4 uas-gfp/uas-atg1kq13a. (g)
control: hsp70-gal4/+. atg1: hsp70-gal4/uas-atg16b. atg1k38q:
hsp70-gal4/uas-atg1kq13a.
atg1-induced autophagy inhibits growth and survival
autophagic machinery, respectively, as well as general
factors involved in vesicle transport and vacuolar func-
tion [21].
the role of the kinase activity of yeast atg1 in regulat-
ing autophagy is the matter of some debate, and differ-
ent groups have drawn conﬂicting conclusions. a con-
sensus view, however, may be that autophagy and the
cvt pathway require different levels of atg1 kinase ac-
tivity or that atg1 has different substrates under differing
nutrient conditions. in higher eukaryotes, the role of
atg1 kinase activity may differ from that in yeast, but
the cvt pathway has not been observed in metazoan
cells. consistent with the ﬁndings of ohsumi and col-
leagues [18, 24], however, our results indicate that the
kinase domain of drosophila atg1 is required for autoph-
agy, as indicated by the fact that the kinase-inactive
atg1k38q mutant failed to restore starvation-induced
autophagy to atg1 mutants and was unable to induce
autophagy when overexpressed. however, the partial re-
duction in size and tor activity observed upon expres-
sion of atg1k38q, as well as its partial rescue of atg1
mutants, indicate that atg1 may have other, kinase-inde-
pendent functions beyond regulating autophagy.
the mechanisms by which upstream signaling path-
ways regulate atg1 are also likely to differ between yeast
and multicellular organisms, because essential compo-
nents of the tor-regulated atg1 complex such as atg13
and atg17 are not readily identiﬁable in animal genomes.
nonetheless, our results are consistent with a similar
negative regulation of atg1 by tor, as indicated by
the fact that activation of tor signaling by rheb overex-
pression or tsc2 mutation suppressed the ability of atg1
to induce autophagy.
increased atg1 activity in re-
sponse to loss of tor signaling is likely to be critical
for cell homeostasis and survival, as shown by the fact
that animals doubly mutant for atg1 and tor show a syn-
thetic embryonic lethal phenotype [5]. in addition, our
results demonstrate an unexpected mode of signaling
from atg1 to tor, in which increased atg1 levels lead
to downregulation of tor kinase activity. it is unclear
whether this reﬂects a direct effect of atg1 on the activity
of tor or an upstream regulator, or an indirect conse-
quence of the high level of autophagy in these cells, per-
haps through increased turnover of tor-signaling com-
ponents. the ﬁnding that a pool of tor protein resides
on intracellular vesicles [31, 36] and that tor signaling
is reduced in endocytic mutants [31] suggests that
tor activity may respond to rates of vesicular trafﬁck-
ing, such as autophagy. regardless of mechanism,
these results suggest the existence of a self-reinforcing
feedback loop, whereby increased atg1 levels lead to
downregulation of tor activity, resulting in further acti-
vation of atg1. in contrast, we have shown previously
that induction of autophagy in response to loss of tor
signaling is dampened by the resultant inactivation of
s6k, which is required for normal autophagy [5]. thus,
tor-mediated regulation of autophagy involves both
positive and negative feedback.
autophagy as a negative effector of cell growth
autophagy is a catabolic process that inversely corre-
lates with cell growth, suggesting that increased levels
of autophagy observed in growth-restricted cells may
contribute to their reduced growth rate. the results
presented here provide genetic support for this model.
our data indicate that clones of autophagy-defective
cells have a growth advantage over wild-type cells un-
der physiological conditions that normally induce au-
tophagy, including starvation and rapamycin treatment.
these results are conﬁrmed by the marked size reduc-
tion of cells overexpressing atg1, further supporting
the role of autophagy as a negative effector of growth
in tor signaling. thus, autophagy is partly responsible
for the growth restriction resulting from physiological in-
hibition of tor signaling and is capable of inhibiting
growth independent of tor signaling.
in contrast to the growth advantage we observed in
autophagy-defective cells, previous studies with yeast
or cultured mammalian cells reported that inhibition of
autophagy results in rapid cell death in response to star-
vation [2, 17]. this difference is likely due to the mosaic
nature of our experiments, in which clones of atg1 mu-
tant cells are surrounded by autophagy-competent
wild-type cells and may in effect parasitize nutrients lib-
erated through the autophagic activity of their neighbors.
this is likely to be particularly evident in fat body cells,
which are specialized for nutrient storage and mobiliza-
tion. we note that this genetic mosaicism is similar to
the situation facing tumor cells within wild-type tissues.
thus, the increased growth capacity resulting from dis-
ruption of autophagy may contribute to the tumorigenic-
ity of cells mutant for tumor suppressors such as pten,
tsc1 and 2, beclin 1/atg6 [5, 7, 8], and possibly lc3/
atg8 and atg7 [37].
whereas autophagy had an inhibitory effect on cell
growth under physiological conditions, this was not the
case in cells with severely disrupted tor signaling,
such as in cells with null mutations in pdk1 (this report)
or tor [5], despite the strong correlation of reduced cell
growth and increased autophagy in these cells. disrup-
tion of autophagy had no effect on the growth of pdk1
null cells and actually led to a further decrease in cell
size of tor mutants. in the complete absence of tor sig-
naling, nutrient uptake is severely curtailed [31], and un-
der these extreme conditions, the metabolic beneﬁts of
nutrients liberated by autophagy may outweigh its po-
tential growth-inhibitory catabolic effect. we conclude
that autophagy has context-dependent effects on cell
growth, providing for a rudimentary level of metabolism
and growth under conditions of severe nutrient depriva-
tion, acting as a net inhibitor of growth under conditions
of reduced tor signaling, and strongly inhibiting cell
growth when induced to high levels. these ﬁndings
add autophagy to the growing list of effector pathways
and cellular processes through which tor signaling
controls cell growth, including translation, transcription,
nutrient import, and endocytosis.
autophagy and cell death
previous studies in a number of experimental systems
indicate that the role of autophagy in cell death is also
likely to be context dependent. for example, autophagy
has been found to protect against cell death in cases of
growth factor withdrawal, starvation, and neurodegen-
eration [17, 38, 39] but to be required for some cases
of autophagic cell death [14–16, 40]. thus, observations
of autophagic structures in dying cells are equally con-
sistent with a causal, neutral, or even inhibitory role of
current biology
10
autophagy in cell death. the ability to induce autophagy
through atg1 overexpression has enabled us to directly
test the potential role of autophagy in promoting cell
death. our results indicate that induction of autophagy
is sufficient to induce cell death. we find that death resulting from atg1-induced autophagy is suppressed by
caspase inhibition and is associated with caspase activation, dna fragmentation, and cytoskeletal disruption,
suggesting that high levels of autophagy result in apoptotic cell death. the connection between apoptosis
and autophagy is further supported by the recent demonstration that overexpression of the antiapoptotic protein bcl-2 can inhibit autophagy by interacting with the
atg6 homolog beclin 1 [41]. mutant versions of beclin
1 that are unable to bind bcl-2 stimulate autophagy
and promote cell death, similar to the effects of atg1.
by what mechanisms might autophagy lead to cell
death? the observation that starvation-induced autophagy is reversible and does not normally result in cell elimination suggests that starvation conditions may be protective against autophagy-induced death. induction of
autophagy is tolerated or even beneficial in cells with
reduced biosynthetic activity, but may be detrimental
in cells whose resources are devoted to continued
growth. self-limiting mechanisms also serve to prevent
starvation-induced autophagy from proceeding at continuously high levels [5, 41]. during autophagic cell
death, alternate activation of the autophagic machinery
may circumvent these feedback mechanisms, resulting
in high levels of sustained autophagy that are destructive
to the cell. in addition, the level of atg1 gene expression
may be critical; it is not upregulated under starvation
conditions [27], but its levels peak at the beginning of
the drosophila pupal stage [42], when autophagic cell
death is induced. autophagic cell death may also result
from the selective degradation of specific survivalpromoting or death-inhibiting factors. in this regard, it
was recently shown that the caspase-inhibitor zvad results in targeted autophagic degradation of catalase,
leading to accumulation of radical oxygen species and
death [16].
concluding remarks
in summary, our results demonstrate that constitutive
induction of autophagy inhibits cell growth and leads to
cell death, highlighting the importance of physiological
mechanisms that restrain this process. in addition, the
finding that atg1 expression is sufficient to induce autophagy provides a new tool for experimental or therapeutic manipulation of autophagy. compounds that target the kinase activity of atg1 may lead to novel therapies
for the wide range of diseases linked to autophagy.
experimental procedures
gfp-marked overexpression clones in the fat body were generated
through heat shock-independent induction as described [43] and in
the wing disc by means of 1 hr heat shock at 37 c, 36–48 hr after
hatching (elimination studies) or 30–60 min heat shock at 37 c,
24–52 hr after hatching (staining). mutant clones in the fat body
were generated by flp/frt mitotic recombination [44] by means
of 2 hr heat shock at 37 c, 0–8 hr after egg laying. cell elimination
was quantitated with 5 images of each genotype; an average of
208 cells were quantitated. because ubi-gfp was found to have
variable expression in the fat body, uas-gfp driven by fb-gal4
or cg-gal4 was used as a marker in that tissue. mutant clones in
the wing disc were generated with 2 hr heat shock at 37 c, 24–28
hr after hatching. 72–96 hr after hatching, untreated larvae containing mutant clones were dissected immediately (fed) or starved for
45 hr on pbs (starved). rapamycin-treated larvae were raised on
2 mm rapamycin in fly medium from hatching and were dissected
192–196 hr after hatching. hsp70-gal4-driven overexpression
of atg1 was induced by 2 hr (1 hr in figure 5) heat shock at 37 c,
48–72 hr after hatching, followed by 6 hr recovery at room temperature. significance was determined in all experiments by two-tailed
p values from unpaired t test. see supplemental data for additional
procedures.
supplemental data
supplemental data include three figures and supplemental experimental procedures and can be found with this article online
at http://www.current-biology.com/cgi/content/full/17/1/1/dc1/.
acknowledgments
we thank members of the neufeld lab for helpful discussions and
comments on the manuscript. this work was supported by national
institutes of health grant ro1 gm62509.
received: june 6, 2006
revised: october 20, 2006
accepted: october 26, 2006
published: january 8, 2007
references
1. levine, b., and klionsky, d.j. (2004). development by selfdigestion: molecular mechanisms and biological functions of
autophagy. dev. cell 6, 463–477.
2. tsukada, m., and ohsumi, y. (1993). isolation and characterization of autophagy-defective mutants of saccharomyces cerevisiae. febs lett. 333, 169–174.
3. thumm, m., egner, r., koch, b., schlumpberger, m., straub, m.,
veenhuis, m., and wolf, d.h. (1994). isolation of autophagocytosis mutants of saccharomyces cerevisiae. febs lett. 349,
275–280.
4. klionsky, d.j., cregg, j.m., dunn, w.a., jr., emr, s.d., sakai, y.,
sandoval, i.v., sibirny, a., subramani, s., thumm, m., veenhuis,
m., et al. (2003). a unified nomenclature for yeast autophagyrelated genes. dev. cell 5, 539–545.
5. scott, r.c., schuldiner, o., and neufeld, t.p. (2004). role and
regulation of starvation-induced autophagy in the drosophila
fat body. dev. cell 7, 167–178.
6. shintani, t., and klionsky, d.j. (2004). autophagy in health and
disease: a double-edged sword. science 306, 990–995.
7. arico, s., petiot, a., bauvy, c., dubbelhuis, p.f., meijer, a.j., codogno, p., and ogier-denis, e. (2001). the tumor suppressor
pten positively regulates macroautophagy by inhibiting the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase b pathway. j.
biol. chem. 276, 35243–35246.
8. liang, x.h., jackson, s., seaman, m., brown, k., kempkes, b.,
hibshoosh, h., and levine, b. (1999). induction of autophagy
and inhibition of tumorigenesis by beclin 1. nature 402, 672–676.
9. petiot, a., ogier-denis, e., blommaart, e.f., meijer, a.j., and
codogno, p. (2000). distinct classes of phosphatidylinositol
30 -kinases are involved in signaling pathways that control macroautophagy in ht-29 cells. j. biol. chem. 275, 992–998.
10. noda, t., and ohsumi, y. (1998). tor, a phosphatidylinositol
kinase homologue, controls autophagy in yeast. j. biol. chem.
273, 3963–3966.
11. neufeld, t.p. (2004). role of autophagy in developmental cell
growth and death: insights from drosophila. in autophagy,
d.j. klionsky, ed. (georgetown: landes bioscience), pp. 224–
232.
12. wullschleger, s., loewith, r., and hall, m.n. (2006). tor signaling in growth and metabolism. cell 124, 471–484.
13. clarke, p.g. (1990). developmental cell death: morphological
diversity and multiple mechanisms. anat. embryol. (berl.) 181,
195–213.
32. hosokawa, n., hara, y., and mizushima, n. (2006). generation of
cell lines with tetracycline-regulated autophagy and a role for
autophagy in controlling cell size. febs lett. 580, 2623–2629.
33. debnath, j., mills, k.r., collins, n.l., reginato, m.j., muthu-
swamy, s.k., and brugge, j.s. (2002). the role of apoptosis in
creating and maintaining luminal space within normal and
oncogene-expressing mammary acini. cell 111, 29–40.
34. martin, d.n., and baehrecke, e.h. (2004). caspases function in
autophagic programmed cell death in drosophila. development
131, 275–284.
35. puig, o., marr, m.t., ruhf, m.l., and tjian, r. (2003). control of
cell number by drosophila foxo: downstream and feedback
regulation of the insulin receptor pathway. genes dev. 17,
2006–2020.
36. kunz, j., schneider, u., howald, i., schmidt, a., and hall, m.n.
(2000). heat repeats mediate plasma membrane localization
of tor2p in yeast. j. biol. chem. 275, 37011–37020.
37. jin, s. (2006). autophagy, mitochondrial quality control, and
oncogenesis. autophagy 2, 80–84.
38. hara, t., nakamura, k., matsui, m., yamamoto, a., nakahara, y.,
suzuki-migishima, r., yokoyama, m., mishima, k., saito, i.,
okano, h., et al. (2006). suppression of basal autophagy in neu-
ral cells causes neurodegenerative disease in mice. nature 441,
885–889.
39. komatsu, m., waguri, s., chiba, t., murata, s., iwata, j., tanida,
i., ueno, t., koike, m., uchiyama, y., kominami, e., et al. (2006).
loss of autophagy in the central nervous system causes neuro-
degeneration in mice. nature 441, 880–884.
40. yu, l., alva, a., su, h., dutt, p., freundt, e., welsh, s., baeh-
recke, e.h., and lenardo, m.j. (2004). regulation of an atg7-
beclin 1 program of autophagic cell death by caspase-8. sci-
ence 304, 1500–1502.
41. pattingre, s., tassa, a., qu, x., garuti, r., liang, x.h., mizush-
ima, n., packer, m., schneider, m.d., and levine, b. (2005).
bcl-2 antiapoptotic proteins inhibit beclin 1-dependent auto-
phagy. cell 122, 927–939.
42. arbeitman, m.n., furlong, e.e., imam, f., johnson, e., null, b.h.,
baker, b.s., krasnow, m.a., scott, m.p., davis, r.w., and white,
k.p. (2002). gene expression during the life cycle of drosophila
melanogaster. science 297, 2270–2275.
43. britton, j.s., lockwood, w.k., li, l., cohen, s.m., and edgar,
b.a. (2002). drosophila’s insulin/pi3-kinase pathway coordi-
nates cellular metabolism with nutritional conditions. dev. cell
2, 239–249.
44. xu, t., and rubin, g.m. (1993). analysis of genetic mosaics in de-
veloping and adult drosophila tissues. development 117, 1223–
1237.
atg1-induced autophagy inhibits growth and survival
11
14. shimizu, s., kanaseki, t., mizushima, n., mizuta, t., arakawa-
kobayashi, s., thompson, c.b., and tsujimoto, y. (2004). role
of bcl-2 family proteins in a non-apoptotic programmed cell
death dependent on autophagy genes. nat. cell biol. 6, 1221–
1228.
15. veneault-fourrey, c., barooah, m., egan, m., wakley, g., and
talbot, n.j. (2006). autophagic fungal cell death is necessary
for infection by the rice blast fungus. science 312, 580–583.
16. yu, l., wan, f., dutta, s., welsh, s., liu, z., freundt, e., baeh-
recke, e.h., and lenardo, m. (2006). autophagic programmed
cell death by selective catalase degradation. proc. natl. acad.
sci. usa 103, 4952–4957.
17. lum, j.j., bauer, d.e., kong, m., harris, m.h., li, c., lindsten, t.,
and thompson, c.b. (2005). growth factor regulation of auto-
phagy and cell survival in the absence of apoptosis. cell 120,
237–248.
18. kamada, y., funakoshi, t., shintani, t., nagano, k., ohsumi, m.,
and ohsumi, y. (2000). tor-mediated induction of autophagy via
an apg1 protein kinase complex. j. cell biol. 150, 1507–1513.
19. wang, z., wilson, w.a., fujino, m.a., and roach, p.j. (2001). an-
tagonistic controls of autophagy and glycogen accumulation by
snf1p, the yeast homolog of amp-activated protein kinase, and
the cyclin-dependent kinase pho85p. mol. cell. biol. 21, 5742–
5752.
20. budovskaya, y.v., stephan, j.s., deminoff, s.j., and herman,
p.k.
(2005). an evolutionary proteomics approach identiﬁes
substrates of the camp-dependent protein kinase. proc. natl.
acad. sci. usa 102, 13933–13938.
21. ptacek, j., devgan, g., michaud, g., zhu, h., zhu, x., fasolo, j.,
guo, h., jona, g., breitkreutz, a., sopko, r., et al. (2005). global
analysis of protein phosphorylation in yeast. nature 438, 679–
684.
22. reggiori, f., tucker, k.a., stromhaug, p.e., and klionsky, d.j.
(2004). the atg1-atg13 complex regulates atg9 and atg23 re-
trieval transport from the pre-autophagosomal structure. dev.
cell 6, 79–90.
23. abeliovich, h., zhang, c., dunn, w.a., jr., shokat, k.m., and
klionsky, d.j. (2003). chemical genetic analysis of apg1 reveals
a non-kinase role in the induction of autophagy. mol. biol. cell
14, 477–490.
24. kabeya, y., kamada, y., baba, m., takikawa, h., sasaki, m., and
ohsumi, y. (2005). atg17 functions in cooperation with atg1 and
atg13 in yeast autophagy. mol. biol. cell 16, 2544–2553.
25. rusten, t.e., lindmo, k., juha´ sz, g., sass, m., seglen, p.o.,
brech, a., and stenmark, h. (2004). programmed autophagy in
the drosophila fat body is induced by ecdysone through regula-
tion of the pi3k pathway. dev. cell 7, 179–192.
26. young, a.r., chan, e.y., hu, x.w., kochl, r., crawshaw, s.g.,
high, s., hailey, d.w., lippincott-schwartz, j., and tooze, s.a.
(2006). starvation and ulk1-dependent cycling of mammalian
atg9 between the tgn and endosomes. j. cell sci. 119, 3888–
3900.
27. kirisako, t., baba, m., ishihara, n., miyazawa, k., ohsumi, m.,
yoshimori, t., noda, t., and ohsumi, y. (1999). formation pro-
cess of autophagosome is traced with apg8/aut7p in yeast.
j. cell biol. 147, 435–446.
28. kabeya, y., mizushima, n., ueno, t., yamamoto, a., kirisako, t.,
noda, t., kominami, e., ohsumi, y., and yoshimori, t. (2000).
lc3, a mammalian homologue of yeast apg8p, is localized in
autophagosome membranes after processing. embo j. 19,
5720–5728.
29. zinke, i., schutz, c.s., katzenberger, j.d., bauer, m., and pan-
kratz, m.j. (2002). nutrient control of gene expression in dro-
sophila: microarray analysis of starvation and sugar-dependent
response. embo j. 21, 6162–6173.
30. juha´ sz, g., csiko´ s, g., sinka, r., erde´ lyi, m., and sass, m.
(2003). the drosophila homolog of aut1 is essential for autoph-
agy and development. febs lett. 543, 154–158.
31. hennig, k.m., colombani, j., and neufeld, t.p. (2006). tor co-
ordinates bulk and targeted endocytosis in the drosophila mel-
anogaster fat body to regulate cell growth. j. cell biol. 173, 963–
974.