www.elsevier.com/locate/ynbdi
neurobiology of disease 25 (2007) 252 – 265
the formation of peripheral myelin protein 22 aggregates
is hindered by the enhancement of autophagy and expression
of cytoplasmic chaperones
jenny fortun, jonathan d. verrier, jocelyn c. go, irina madorsky,
william a. dunn, and lucia notterpek⁎
departments of neuroscience and anatomy and cell biology, college of medicine, mcknight brain institute, university of florida,
100 newell drive, box 100244, gainesville, fl 32610-0244, usa
received 14 july 2006; revised 29 august 2006; accepted 7 september 2006
available online 13 december 2006
the accumulation of misfolded proteins is associated with various
neurodegenerative conditions. peripheral myelin protein 22 (pmp22)
is a hereditary neuropathy-linked, short-lived molecule that forms
aggresomes when the proteasome is inhibited or the protein is mutated.
we previously showed that
the removal of pre-existing pmp22
aggregates is assisted by autophagy. here we examined whether the
accumulation of such aggregates could be suppressed by experimental
induction of autophagy and/or chaperones. enhancement of autop-
hagy during proteasome inhibition hinders protein aggregate forma-
tion and correlates with a reduction in accumulated proteasome
substrates. conversely, simultaneous inhibition of autophagy and the
proteasome augments the formation of aggregates. an increase of heat
shock protein levels by geldanamycin treatment or heat shock pre-
conditioning similarly hampers aggresome formation. the beneficial
effects of autophagy and chaperones in preventing the accumulation of
misfolded pmp22 are additive and provide a potential avenue for
therapeutic approaches in hereditary neuropathies linked to pmp22
mutations.
© 2006 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.
keywords: autophagosome; proteasome; neuropathy; schwann cells;
protein misfolding; aggresomes; heat shock proteins; heat shock
introduction
in order to maintain cellular homeostasis, different quality
control mechanisms evolved which prevent the accumulation of
misfolded or nonfunctional polypeptides in aggregates (goldberg,
2003). when the correct folding and/or trafficking of a nascent
polypeptide fail, the protein is commonly targeted for degradation
by the ubiquitin–proteasome system (ups) (goldberg, 2003). the
proteasome is an enzymatic complex that contains a catalytic
chamber inside of which unfolded polypeptides are degraded
(groll and clausen, 2003).
in addition to the proteasome,
unwanted cytoplasmic proteins can be degraded within lysosomes.
macroautophagy, from here on referred to as autophagy,
is a
constitutive event by which cytoplasmic cargo is engulfed in
double membrane-bound structures called autophagosomes that
later fuse with lysosomes, ensuring degradation of the cargo
(klionsky and emr, 2000). when the balance between synthesis/
folding and degradation pathways is disrupted, the accumulation of
proteins in aggregates is favored, which constitutes the patholo-
gical hallmark of several neurodegenerative conditions (ciechan-
over and brundin, 2003).
peripheral myelin protein 22 (pmp22)
is a hydrophobic,
aggregation-prone, membrane protein expressed mainly in myeli-
nating schwann cells (scs) (snipes et al., 1992; tobler et al.,
2002). in non-myelinating and myelinating scs,
the majority
(~80%) of the newly synthesized pmp22 is rapidly degraded by
the ups, presumably due to misfolding (pareek et al., 1997).
mutations in pmp22, or duplication of the pmp22 gene, are
associated with hereditary demyelinating neuropathies among
which, charcot–marie–tooth type 1a (cmt1a) is the most
common form (young and suter, 2001). although the molecular
mechanisms underlying cmt1a are not well understood, halted
intracellular protein trafficking and formation of aggregates are
believed to play roles (d’urso et al., 1998; tobler et al., 1999;
naef and suter, 1999; colby et al., 2000; fortun et al., 2003,
2006).
the spontaneous
in scs of cmt1a mouse models,
abbreviations: pmp22, peripheral myelin protein 22; sc, schwann cell;
wt, wild type; hsp, heat shock protein; lc,
lactacystin; dmso,
dimethylsulfoxide; stv, starvation; 3-ma, 3-methyladenine; ga, geldana-
mycin; hs, heat shock; gfp, green fluorescent protein; cmt1a, charcot–
marie–tooth disease type 1a; p, postnatal; ups, ubiquitin–proteasome
system; cma, chaperone-mediated autophagy.
⁎ corresponding author. fax: +1 352 846 3854.
e-mail address: notterp@mbi.ufl.edu (l. notterpek).
available online on sciencedirect (www.sciencedirect.com).
0969-9961/$ - see front matter © 2006 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2006.09.018
j. fortun et al. / neurobiology of disease 25 (2007) 252–265
253
accumulation of misfolded pmp22 in aggregates correlates with
impaired proteasome activity (fortun et al., 2005, 2006). these
aggregates resemble pmp22 inclusions formed in cultured scs
upon pharmacological
termed
aggresomes (johnston et al., 1998; notterpek et al., 1999).
the proteasome,
inhibition of
it is still debated whether the formation of cytosolic protein
aggregates, such as of pmp22, are harmful or protective in given
disease paradigms. in models of cmt1a, pmp22 aggregates
associate with autophagosomes and lysosomes, as well as heat
shock proteins (hsps), suggesting endogenous activation of these
pathways in response to the presence of misfolded proteins
(notterpek et al., 1997; ryan et al., 2002; fortun et al., 2003,
2005). cooperation of
the aggresome and autophagy in the
removal of aggregation-prone proteins is supported by pharmaco-
logic studies in hela cells (iwata et al., 2005). using a similar
approach, previously we showed that removal of pre-existing
aggresomes formed by endogenous pmp22 is aided by autophagy
(fortun et al., 2003). a second cellular mechanism that can
influence protein aggregation is the heat shock response. hsps are
molecular chaperones that prevent protein aggregation, either by
aiding degradation via chaperone-mediated autophagy (cma) or
the ups, or by promoting re-folding (muchowski and wacker,
2005). in proteasome-inhibited cells, overexpressed wild-type (wt)
and mutant pmp22s, as well as the spontaneous aggregates in
neuropathic mouse nerves, recruit hsps (ryan et al., 2002; fortun
et al., 2003). nonetheless, it is not known if elevated levels of
chaperones are able to influence the folding efficiency of pmp22.
as a step toward the development of therapeutic approaches for
pmp22-associated neuropathies, here we asked whether
the
induction of autophagy and/or hsps could prevent the formation
of cytosolic pmp22 aggregates.
the stimulation of
autophagy or the heat shock response is able to significantly
reduce the formation of aggregates, and relieve the impairment of
the proteasome. these results support the further development of
pharmacologic agents targeted at modulating the autophagic and
chaperone systems.
indeed,
materials and methods
animal housing
trembler j (trj) (jackson laboratories) mouse breeding colony
is housed under spf conditions at the mcknight brain institute
animal facility. the use of animals for these studies is approved by
a university of florida institutional animal care and use
committee. genomic dna was isolated from tail biopsies of
mouse pups up to 8 days old and litters were genotyped by pcr
(notterpek et al., 1997). for the western blotting experiments,
sciatic nerves from 6-month-old (adult) wt and heterozygous
neuropathic mice were used. for the primary mouse sc cultures,
sciatic nerves from genotyped postnatal day 5 (p5) littermates were
used.
cell culture and aggresome formation
primary sc cultures were established from newborn rat or p5
mouse pups (ryan et al., 2002). rat scs were grown to ~80%
confluency in 10% fetal calf serum (hyclone, logan, ut), 5 μm
forskolin (calbiochem, la jolla, ca) and 10 μg/ml bovine
pituitary extract (biomedical technologies inc, stoughton, ma)
containing dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium. scs were treated
with the proteasome inhibitor lactacystin (lc) (10 μm) (biomol
research laboratories, pa), or
its vehicle, dimethylsulfoxide
(dmso) (sigma), as a control (notterpek et al., 1999). treatments
were performed for 12 h or 16 h, as indicated in the text. the
proteasome inhibitors epoxomicin (5 μm) and mg-132 (20 μm)
(both from biomol) were also used to exclude that effects were
unique to lactacystin. after each treatment paradigm, the cells were
immediately processed for
immunostaining to visualize the
aggregates, or for western blotting to evaluate the accumulation
of ubiquitinated proteins (notterpek et al., 1999). primary mouse
scs from wt and neuropathic nerves were used within 24 h of
culture, without pharmacologic treatments.
visualization of autophagosomes by direct fluorescence
microscopy
autophagic vacuoles were visualized by labeling with mono-
dansylcadaverine (mdc) or gfp-lc3 (munafo and colombo,
2001; kabeya et al., 2000). scs from wt or trj mice grown on
coverslips were labeled with 100 μm mdc (sigma) for 1 h in
serum-free medium (dmem) and immediately imaged, or fixed
with 4% paraformaldehyde prior to imaging. rat or mouse scs
plated at equal densities were transfected with gfp-lc3 plasmid
(kabeya et al., 2000) using the lipofectamine method (invitrogen,
life technology, carlsbad, ca). transfection efficiency was
~36% using the greenlantern plasmid (invitrogen). twenty-
four hours after transfection, the relationship between spontaneous
(mouse scs) or lc-induced (16 h, 10 μm in rat scs) aggregates
and gfp-lc3 fluorescence was evaluated by immunostaining
using anti-pmp22 antibodies, as explained in the text.
ultrastuctural studies
rat scs treated with or without proteasome inhibitors for 12 h
or 16 h, were fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde and 2.5%
glutaraldehyde in 0.1 m sodium cacodylate buffer (ph 7.5), with
7% sucrose, at 4°c for 60 min. the specimens were then treated
with 2% oso4 and uranyl acetate, and dehydrated and embedded
in epon resin. for localization of acid phosphatase (acp) activity,
the samples were treated with cytidine 5′-monophosphate and
cerium chloride after fixation (lenk et al., 1992). thin sections
were examined on a jeol 100cx transmission electron micro-
scope. the volume of autophagosomes divided by the volume of
cytoplasm was determined in eight
independent samples of
proteasome inhibited or control cells. the results are presented
as percentages of cytoplasm volumes. statistical significance
between the various paradigms was determined using a student’s
t-test.
modulation of autophagy and molecular chaperones
to determine the effects of autophagy and molecular chaper-
ones on the formation of protein aggregates, proteasome inhibition
was carried out in the absence or the presence of the following
modulators. for the stimulation of autophagy, scs were incubated
in media deprived of amino acids and serum (starvation medium)
(fortun et al., 2003), or
treated with rapamycin (200 nm)
(calbiochem) (ravikumar et al., 2004). to block autophagy,
3-methyladenine (3-ma) (10 mm) (sigma) was included, without
or during proteasome inhibition, in normal or starvation medium
(fortun et al., 2003). the effects of elevated hsps were evaluated
254
j. fortun et al. / neurobiology of disease 25 (2007) 252–265
by two approaches, with and without lc. in the first paradigm, cells
were treated with geldanamycin (ga) (125 nm–2 μm) for 16 h
(mclean et al., 2004). alternatively, cells were incubated at 45°c
for 20 min (heat shock; hs) followed by a chase for 0–16 h (allen
et al., 2004). for the combined treatment, cells were first exposed to
a 20 min hs, followed by incubation at 37°c in fresh starvation
medium, with or without lc. cells with aggresomes were visualized
by immunostaining with monoclonal anti-pmp22 and polyclonal
anti-ubiquitin antibodies (see below).
immunofluorescence and aggresome quantification
(molecular probes).
cultured scs on glass coverslips were fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde for 10 min and permeabilized with 0.2% triton
x-100 for 15 min at room temperature. after blocking with 10%
normal goat serum, the samples were incubated with the indicated
primary antibodies overnight at 4°c. bound antibodies were
detected using alexa fluor 594-conjugated (red) anti-rabbit and
alexa fluor 488-conjugated (green) anti-mouse antibodies (mo-
lecular probes, eugene, or). samples were then mounted using
the prolong antifade kit
images were
acquired with a spot digital camera (diagnostic instrumentals,
sterling heights, mi) attached to a nikon eclipse e800 (tokyo,
japan), or an olympus mrc-1024 confocal microscope. the
number of cells with aggresomes was quantified and expressed as
a percent of total cells, as detected by nuclear staining with
hoechst #33258 (molecular probes, eugene, or). all experiments
were repeated independently at least three times, and in each one,
cells in eight different visual fields (0.277 μm2 actual area) were
counted. the criteria for aggresome counting included: 1)
immunoreactivity for ubiquitin and pmp22; 2) assembly at
perinuclear region; 3) exclusion from er and golgi and 4)
diameter larger than 1 μm. statistical significance between the
various treatment paradigms was evaluated using a student’s t-test.
images were processed for printing using adobe photoshop 5.0
(adobe systems, san jose, ca).
primary antibodies
a mouse monoclonal antibody was used to detect pmp22 in the
studied samples (chemicon, temencula, ca). to monitor
autophagy, a polyclonal rabbit anti-microtubule-associated protein
1, light chain 3 (lc3) antibody, generated against an eighteen
amino acid portion of the human protein [sektfkqrrtfeqr-
vedv(c)], was utilized. antibodies for protein chaperones
included anti-calnexin, anti-heat shock protein 70 (hsp70),
hsp40 and αb-crystallin (all from stressgen, victoria british
columbia, canada). monoclonal anti-actin, -tubulin (both from
sigma), -ubiquitin (santa cruz biotechnology, ca) and polyclonal
anti-gfp (gift from dr. g. shaw, university of florida), -ubiquitin
(dako, carpinteria, ca), cathepsin d (cortex biochem, san
leandro, ca) were obtained from the indicated suppliers.
western blot analyses
frozen sciatic nerves from 6-month-old genotyped mice were
crushed under liquid nitrogen, lysed in immunoprecipitation buffer
[10 mm tris–hcl (ph 7.5), 5 mm edta, 1% nonidet p-40,
0.5% deoxycholate and 150 mm nacl] supplemented with a
mixture of protease inhibitors (complete™; roche, indianapolis,
in) (fortun et al., 2003). for each lysate, at least six nerves from
three mice per genotype were used. the lysates were micro-
centrifuged, the supernatant removed and the insoluble material
incubated with 10 mm tris–hcl, 3% sds for 10 min at room
temperature. following a brief sonication, total protein concentra-
tions were measured by bca assay (pierce, rockford, il). after
exposure to the specified conditions, cultured rat scs were lysed
with 3% sodium dodecyl sulfate (sds) containing gel sample
buffer, supplemented with protease inhibitors (fortun et al., 2006).
protein lysates were separated on sds gels and transferred onto
nitrocellulose or pvdf membranes (for ubiquitin and lc3). blots
were blocked and incubated with the indicated primary antibodies.
after
incubation with anti-rabbit or anti-mouse horseradish
peroxidase (hrp) conjugated secondary antibodies (sigma, st.
louis, mo), membranes were reacted with an enhanced
chemiluminescent substrate (perkin elmer, boston, ma). films
were digitally imaged using a gs-710 densitometer (bio-rad
laboratories).
proteasome reporter assay
to monitor ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis by the ups, a green
fluorescent protein (gfp)-based substrate was utilized (dantuma et
al., 2000). rat scs plated at equal densities were transfected with an
ubg76v-gfp reporter construct using the lipofectamine method
(invitrogen, life technology, carlsbad, ca). the attachment of a
mutated uncleavable ubiquitin moiety to the normally very stable
gfp results in a fusion protein (ubg76v-gfp) that
is rapidly
degraded by the proteasome and is hardly detected under normal
conditions (dantuma et al., 2000). the efficiency of transfection was
~43% using the greenlantern gfp plasmid (invitrogen) (fortun et
al., 2006). twenty-four hours after transfection, the cells were
treated with lc (10 μm) with or without autophagy modulation, as
explained in the text. sixteen hours later, cells were imaged for gfp
expression and phase contrast using a t1-sm inverted microscope
equipped with a nikon ds-l1 camera. cellular levels of gfp were
determined by western blotting using anti-gfp and anti-tubulin
(loading control) antibodies. the intensity of bands was quantified
using scion images software (scion, frederick, md). the relative
levels of ubg76v-gfp were expressed as the absorbance units of the
gfp band, after correction for tubulin. the results from duplicates of
three independent experiments were averaged, graphed and
analyzed using a student’s t-test.
results
correlation between the formation of spontaneous pmp22
aggregates and autophagy
spontaneous protein aggregates accumulate in the cytoplasm of
scs from cmt1a-like neuropathic mice based on pmp22 point
mutation (trj) or overexpression of the wt protein (ryan et al., 2002;
fortun et al., 2003, 2006). morphological studies show that these
aggregates are often surrounded by lysosomes and autophagosomes,
suggesting ongoing autophagy. to further examine the involvement
of autophagy in neuropathic samples, primary scs derived from p5
trj mouse nerves were examined (fig. 1). when scs from wt and
trj neuropathic mice are incubated with mdc dye, a marker for
autophagic vacuoles, brighter and more numerous vesicles are
detected in trj, as compared to wt cells (fig. 1a). as a biochemical
measure of autophagy, next we evaluated the levels and lipidation of
the autophagic marker lc3 (fig. 1b). after cleavage of the newly
j. fortun et al. / neurobiology of disease 25 (2007) 252–265
255
fig. 1. aggregates in neuropathic scs recruit autophagosomes. (a) autophagosomes were visualized by mdc dye uptake in acutely cultured scs from wt and
trj mouse nerves. images shown were collected at identical settings of the camera. (b) whole lysates (t), detergent-soluble (s) and detergent-insoluble (i)
fractions from wt and trj neuropathic mouse nerves (15 μg/lane) were blotted with anti-lc3 antibodies. the arrowhead and arrow point at the lc3 i and lc3 ii
forms, respectively. molecular masses are indicated at the left, in kda. (c) the localization of endogenous lc3 was evaluated by double labeling with anti-lc3
(red) and anti-pmp22 (green) antibodies in scs from trj mice. (d) the recruitment of autophagosomes (green) to pmp22 aggregates (red) is visualized by direct
gfp fluorescence in gfp-lc3 transfected trj cultures (d). scale bars: 10 μm.
synthesized lc3, the cytosolic form (lc3 i) becomes lipidated
(lc3 ii) and incorporates into the limiting membrane of
autophagosomes, which is detected as a change in mobility on gel
electrophoresis (tanida et al., 2004). analysis of total (t), detergent-
soluble (s), and -insoluble (i) fractions of sciatic nerve lysates from
wt and trj mice reveals an increase in the levels of lc3 i in the
neuropathic sample, as compared to wt. furthermore, lc3 ii, the
lipidated form bound to the autophagosome membrane, is below
detection in lysates of wt nerves, but prominent and readily visible in
trj. surprisingly, only a small fractions of lc3 i, but not lc3 ii, are
found in the detergent-insoluble fraction. it is feasible that lc3 i
associates with the aggregates and hence its detergent-insolubility,
whereas the binding of lc3 ii to the autophagosome membrane
confers solubility to the aggregate in its route to degradation.
to examine the spatial association of autophagosomes with
pmp22 aggregates, primary scs isolated from p5 trj mice were
costained with anti-lc3 and pmp22 antibodies (fig. 1c). the
merged image shows a perinuclear pmp22 aggregate in close
association with the endogenous lc3. in agreement, cultures
transfected with a gfp-lc3 plasmid to visualize autophagic
vacuoles by direct fluorescence, show gfp-labeled autophagosomes
in the vicinity of pmp22 aggregates (fig. 1d). autophagosomes
were also detected near protein aggregates in nerves and scs isolated
from pmp22 overexpressor mice (fortun et al., 2006). together,
these results indicate that compared to wt, autophagy is induced in
neuropathic mouse nerves containing spontaneous aggregates of
mutated (fig. 1) or overproduced pmp22 (fortun et al., 2006).
pmp22 aggregates formed under proteasome inhibition recruit
autophagosomes
a large fraction of the newly synthesized wt pmp22 is substrate
for the ups and forms aggregates when this pathway is inhibited
(notterpek et al., 1999). specifically, over ninety percent of
cultured scs contain aggresomes of endogenous pmp22 after a 16-h
treatment with proteasome inhibitors (notterpek et al., 1999;
256
j. fortun et al. / neurobiology of disease 25 (2007) 252–265
ryan et al., 2002; fortun et al., 2003). these aggregates fulfill all
established characteristics of aggresomes,
including exclusion
from the main organelles, recruitment of ubiquitin and micro-
tubule-dependent accumulation (johnston et al., 1998; notterpek
et al., 1999). using this in vitro model, we sought to evaluate the
autophagic response during de novo formation of pmp22 aggregates
(figs. 2 and 3). first, the levels of lc3 in lysates of lactacystin-
treated rat scs were examined (figs. 2a, b). similar to the
neuropathic samples (fig. 1), the formation of pmp22 aggresomes
correlates with higher levels of lc3, both lc3 i and the lipidated
lc3 ii forms, as compared to dmso-treated controls (fig. 2a). as
positive controls for the activation of autophagy and for the
conversion of lc3 i to lc3 ii, cells treated with rapamycin (rp)
were included (fig. 2a). quantification of lc3 levels in five
independent experiments, after correction for actin, corroborates the
increase in lc3 i and ii in proteasome-inhibited cells (fig. 2b).
significantly, the ratio of lc3 ii/i is increased nearly 2-fold (0.287 ±
0.221 vs. 0.429 ± 1.385), as compared to control cells (p = 0.05).
similar results were obtained when using other proteasome
inhibitors, such as epoxomicin or mg132 (not shown). the elevated
levels of lc3 are also noticeable by immunostaining (fig. 2c). in
dmso-treated cells, lc3-like immunoreactivity is low (red), with a
diffuse distribution throughout the cell (fig. 2c, inset). after 16 h of
proteasome inhibition, lc3-labeled autophagosomes (red) are
detected prominently at the periphery of pmp22 aggregates (green).
partial co-localization of lc3 and pmp22 is also evident (yellow on
merged image). utilizing the lc3-gfp transfection approach as for
the primary mouse scs (fig. 1d), green fluorescent autophago-
somes are detected around the lc-induced pmp22 aggregates (red)
(fig. 2d). a similar induction of autophagy in response to
proteasome inhibition has been observed in alln-treated hek-
293 cells (iwata et al., 2005).
to visualize the recruitment of autophagosomes during the
formation of aggresomes, scs incubated with lactacystin for 12 or
16 h were examined by transmission electron microscopy (fig. 3).
after the 12 h of treatment, as determined by anti-ubiquitin and
anti-pmp22 immunostainings, about 57% of the cells contain
aggregates (see quantification below in fig. 5b). the aggregates
are electron dense amorphous inclusions that form in the vicinity of
the nucleus, and many of them are surrounded by autophagosomes
(fig. 3a). the boxed area in fig. 3a is enlarged on the right to
show autophagosomes (arrowheads) at
the
aggregate (arrow). after extended proteasome inhibition (16 h),
over 90% of scs form large protein aggregates (notterpek et al.,
the periphery of
fig. 2. changes in the levels, lipidation and localization of lc3 in pmp22 aggresome-containing cells. (a) the levels of lc3 and actin in dmso control (c), lc
or rapamycin (rp) treated (16 h) cell lysates (20 μg/lane) were determined by western blot. the arrowhead and arrow point at lc3 i and lc3 ii, respectively.
molecular masses are indicated at the left, in kda. (b) the levels of lc3, after correction for actin, were quantified in five independent experiments. au:
absorbance units; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.005. (c) pmp22 aggresomes (green) recruit endogenous lc3 (red) in lc-treated (16 h) cells. the localization of lc3 in
control scs is shown (inset, red). the arrows denote lc3 in the periphery of a pmp22 aggresome. (d) lc-induced pmp22 aggregates (red) are surrounded by
gfp-lc3 containing autophagosomes. nuclei are visualized by hoechst dye (blue) (merge, c and d). scale bars: 10 μm (c, d).
j. fortun et al. / neurobiology of disease 25 (2007) 252–265
257
fig. 3. an increase in autophagosome number and size correlates with aggresome formation. (a) normal rat scs, after 12 h or (b) 16 h treatment with the
proteasome inhibitor lc (10 μm) were processed for ultrastuctural analysis. the large arrows represent electron dense inclusions formed at the different time
points. autophagic vacuoles are visible within (thin arrows) and around the inclusions (arrowheads). enlargements of the boxed areas in a and b are shown at the
right. scale bars: as indicated.
1999, and also see fig. 5), many of which contain autophagosomes
within (narrow arrows) and around (arrowheads) the inclusion
(fig. 3b). the size and the morphology of the autophagosomes
appear heterogeneous, suggestive of the different stages in their
formation and maturation (fig. 3b,
right). to quantify the
activation of autophagy, the volume of autophagosomes relative
to the cytoplasm volume was determined in eight independent
samples. after 12 h of proteasome inhibition,
the volume of
autophagosomes is increased by ~4%, but not significantly
(p = 0.257), as compared to untreated control cells. however, a
7-fold increase (2.43 ± 1.23 vs. 16.92 ± 8.84) was observed after
16 h (p = 0.002), when nearly all the cells contain aggresomes.
this data suggest that autophagy is enhanced coincident with the
formation of pmp22 aggregates.
the presence of
autophagosomes after fusing with lysosomes become auto-
lysosomes and acquire acid phosphatase (acp) and cathepsins
(klionsky and emr, 2000). therefore,
the
lysosomal enzyme, acp,
in aggresome-containing cells was
examined by monitoring enzymatic activity (lenk et al., 1992)
(fig. 4a). lysosomal structures, containing acp (dark reaction
product) are seen in control samples (fig. 4a, control). after
treatment with lc for 16 h, however, more lysosomes (smaller,
round, uniform) and autolysosomes (larger,
less uniform) are
visible, mainly near the nucleus (fig. 4a, lc). furthermore, the
golgi apparatus appears reactive for acp in lc-treated, but not in
control cells (fig. 4a, arrows), suggesting de novo synthesis and
transport of acp through the secretory pathway. the association
of another
lysosomal enzyme cathepsin d with lc-induced
pmp22 aggregates was examined by double immunolabeling
and confocal microscopy (fig. 4b, c). on representative single
plane images, cathepsin d-positive vesicles accumulate in the
region of pmp22 aggregates (fig. 4b). the relationship of
lysosomes (red) with pmp22 aggregates (green) is resolved in
more detail on single plane rotated sections through a specific
aggregate (arrow) (fig. 4c). the red and yellow color within the
green aggregate on the x and y sections is in agreement with the
morphological detection of autolysosomes within the inclusions
(fig. 3). higher numbers and volume of autophagosomes and
autolysosomes, as well as increased levels of lc3 ii (figs. 1–3)
indicate the induction of autophagy by the accumulation of
misfolded pmp22.
the formation of aggresomes is hindered by autophagy
previously we have shown that experimental activation of
autophagy by nutrient deprivation aids the removal of pre-existing
pmp22 aggregates (fortun et al., 2003). the studies described
above indicate (figs. 1–3) that the formation of protein aggregates
in itself, either in response to impaired proteasomal degradation or
spontaneously due to mutations, endogenously induces autophagy.
therefore, we wanted to test if further enhancement of autophagy
by starvation conditions could potentially prevent or reduce the
accumulation of misfolded pmp22 (fig. 5). normal rat scs treated
with lactacystin for 16 h form aggresomes in nearly all of the cells
(fig. 5a) (notterpek et al., 1999), without significant cell death
(fortun et al., 2003). in dmso carrier-treated cells, pmp22 is
detected at low levels in the er and golgi apparatus, and at the
plasma membrane (fig. 5a, dmso inset, also see pareek et al.,
1997). when simultaneous to proteasome inhibition, autophagy is
enhanced (starvation, stv), fewer cells form aggregates (fig. 5a,
lc + stv). to confirm the specificity of this effect,
the same
experiment was carried out in the presence of 3-ma, a known
258
j. fortun et al. / neurobiology of disease 25 (2007) 252–265
we choose 12 h of treatment because about half of the cells at this
time point contain pmp22 aggresomes. after concurrent inhibition
of the proteasome and autophagy for 12 h, the number of cells with
aggresomes is higher than lc alone (p = 0.004), and is similar to lc
at 16 h (fig. 5b) (p = 0.107). these results indicate that under
conditions of reduced proteasome activity, blocking autophagy
accelerates the accumulation of aggregated proteins.
fig. 4. lysosomal enzymes are present at sites of protein aggregation. (a)
control (dmso) or lc-treated (16 h) primary rat scs were processed for
acid phosphatase (acp) cytochemistry. arrows point at golgi stacks, which
are acp-positive in lc-treated, but not in control cells. (b) single-plane
confocal images of lc-treated scs reveal the close association of pmp22
aggresomes (green) and cathepsin d-positive lysosomes (red). (c) a merged
image of the same field is shown, with single x and y plane sections across
the marked aggresome (arrow). these single plane sections reveal the
accumulation of lysosomes (red) around the aggregate (green) (x axis) and
their entrapment within the aggregate (y axis slice). nuclei are visualized by
hoechst stain (blue). scale bars: as indicated in a, and 10 μm for b and c.
blocker of autophagy (dorn et al., 2001). when 3-ma is included
(fig. 5a, lc + stv/3-ma), the beneficial effect of starvation is
partially lost, corroborating that the reduction in the number of
aggresomes was autophagy-dependent. aggregates formed under
these conditions appear less compact compared to lc treatment
alone, suggesting that the inhibition of autophagy by 3-ma is
incomplete. the levels or the localization of pmp22 are not
affected by incubation of the cells in starvation medium, or 3-ma
alone (not shown, see fortun et al., 2003).
the effect of enhanced autophagy on reducing the formation of
aggregates was quantified in three independent experiments after
12 h (diagonal bars) or 16 h (solid bars) of treatment paradigms
(fig. 5b). the criteria for aggresome counting included immunor-
eactivity for ubiquitin and pmp22, assembly at the perinuclear
region, exclusion from er and golgi, and a diameter larger than
1 μm (notterpek et al., 1999). note,
the lack of statistically
significant differences between the 12 h and 16 h lc + stv
treatments, suggesting that the enhancement of autophagy halts
the formation of aggresomes. even after 24 h of proteasome
inhibition and starvation, the percentage of cells with aggregates
remains similar to 12 h or 16 h (34 ± 12%; p = 0.97). analogous
results were obtained when autophagy was stimulated by
rapamycin (lc + rp: 27 ± 4%; p = 0.32). we also examined if
inhibition of autophagy simultaneous to proteasome inhibition
favors aggresome formation. for this, the number of aggregate-
containing cells was compared between fed cells treated with lc
alone, or simultaneously with 3-ma (first and last bars in fig. 5b).
fig. 5. the formation of pmp22 aggregates is modulated by autophagy. (a)
the localization of pmp22 was determined in primary rat scs treated with
lc (16 h) or dmso, as control (inset). to stimulate autophagy, lc treatment
was performed under amino acid and serum-depleted starvation conditions
(lc + stv). arrows indicate aggregates after simultaneous inhibition of the
proteasome and induction of autophagy. to block autophagy, 3-ma was
included in proteasome-inhibited cells, during fed (lc + 3-ma, right inset) or
starved (lc + stv/3-ma) conditions. scale bar: 10 μm. (b) percentage of
cells with pmp22 aggregates was quantified after 12 h (diagonal bars), or
16 h (solid bars) treatment paradigms. the statistical significance of
differences between the various treatment paradigms at 16 h (**p < 0.005),
or at 12 h (##p < 0.005) are denoted. connecting horizontal lines represent
the significance between corresponding treatments (**p < 0.005; n.s., no
significance).
j. fortun et al. / neurobiology of disease 25 (2007) 252–265
259
the formation of protein aggregates is associated with an
overall accumulation of unrelated proteasomal substrates (john-
ston et al., 1998; bence et al., 2001; fortun et al., 2005).
therefore, a reduction in the number of aggregates upon
starvation-induced autophagy should correlate with a decrease
in the levels of accumulated ups substrates. since polyubiqui-
tination is the primary signal
for proteasomal degradation
(goldberg, 2003),
the levels of slow-migrating ubiquitinated
proteins were evaluated after the indicated treatment paradigms
(fig. 6a). compared to control cells (c), lc treatment alone leads
to the accumulation of slow-migrating ubiquitinated proteins,
indicating overall proteasome inhibition. coincident with the
accumulation of polyubiquitinated chains,
the
monomeric ubiquitin (fig. 6a, arrow) is reduced, as compared
to control. when autophagy is enhanced by starvation (stv),
concomitant with lc treatment,
the levels of ubiquitinated
substrates are slightly reduced. starvation alone does not alter
the levels of ubiquitinated proteins. therefore, enhancement of
autophagy in proteasome-inhibited cells reduces the accumulation
of ubiquitinated substrates.
the level of
to further examine the consequences of autophagy-mediated
reduction in protein aggregate formation, we determined the
steady-state levels of a short-lived ubg76v-gfp reporter (fig. 6b).
the attachment of the uncleavable ubg76v to gfp targets this
the rapid turnover
otherwise stable protein for polyubiquitination and rapid protea-
somal degradation and thus, gfp levels are hardly detected unless
the ups is inhibited (dantuma et al., 2000). scs were transiently
transfected with ubg76v-gfp, and after a 24-h period,
the
proteasomal and autophagic pathways were modulated (fig. 6b
and c). after each treatment, the cells were imaged for gfp
fluorescence (fig. 6b, left column) and phase contrast (fig. 6b,
right column) or processed for western blot with anti-gfp
antibodies (fig. 6c). because of
rate of
ubg76v-gfp, its levels are very low (arrowheads) or undetectable
in most control cells (fig. 6b, control). when the proteasome is
the ubg76v-gfp protein accumulates (figs. 6b, c).
inhibited,
inhibition or enhancement of autophagy alone by 3-ma or
starvation conditions, respectively, has no effect on ubg76v-gfp
levels, confirming that this substrate is tagged for proteasomal and
not autophagic degradation (fig. 6c). however, when autophagy is
enhanced simultaneous to lc treatment, the levels of ubg76v-gfp
are considerably reduced, as compared to lc alone (figs. 6b, c). in
a small percentage of these cells, however, intense ubg76v-gfp
signal is still detected (fig. 6b, lc + stv, arrows). as a measure of
specificity, the effects of starvation are blocked by the inclusion of
indicates that by experimental
3-ma (fig. 6c). this result
the accumulation of ubg76v-gfp
enhancement of autophagy,
upon proteasome inhibition can be minimized.
fig. 6. reduced aggresome formation correlates with lower levels of an unrelated proteasome substrate. (a) the levels of ubiquitin (ub) and actin were
determined by western blot of total lysates (15 μg/lane) from fed and starved cells (stv), treated with dmso control (c) or lc (16 h). the arrow denotes the
monomeric ubiquitin (ub). molecular mass are depicted at the left, in kda. (b) rat scs transfected with ubg76v-gfp and treated with the indicated agents (16 h),
were imaged for gfp fluorescence (b, left column), or phase contrast (b, right column). arrowheads indicate the low levels of gfp-like fluorescence in control
cells. arrows point at a small percentage of cells with bright gfp fluorescence, upon enhancement of autophagy during lc treatment (b, lc + stv). (c) the
stabilization of gfp signal was quantified by western blots, after correction for tubulin (duplicates of n.s. = 3). au: absorbance units; *p < 0.05; n.s., no
significance.
260
j. fortun et al. / neurobiology of disease 25 (2007) 252–265
the effects of hsps on aggregate formation
heat shock proteins (hsps) are known to influence the
aggregation of proteins in cultured cells (muchowski and wacker,
2005), and are found within and around pmp22 inclusions in trj
neuropathic nerves (fortun et al., 2003). to assess the relationship
of hsps to proteasome-inhibition induced aggregates of endogen-
ous pmp22, normal rat scs treated with lc, or dmso, were
immunostained with the indicated antibodies (fig. 7). in control
cells, hsp70-like immunoreactivity is low (dmso inset, green),
but becomes distinct following proteasome inhibition (lc) (fig.
7a).
in cells with small ubiquitin-reactive aggregates (red,
arrowheads) the levels of hsp70 are not as dramatically increased.
ubiquitin-like staining however almost exclusively overlaps with
pmp22 aggresomes (right inset; also see notterpek et al., 1999).
the small cytosolic chaperone, αb-crystallin is also recruited
within and around the aggregates resulting in a yellow color on the
merge (fig. 7b). hsp40 is found at the centrosome region in
control cells (inset, arrow), and accumulates with pmp22
aggregates (fig. 7b). the association of hsps with aggresomes
likely represents an attempt of the chaperones to prevent
the
formation and/or favor the dissolution of the inclusions.
the formation of pmp22 aggregates,
to investigate whether increasing the levels of hsps could
rat scs were
hamper
simultaneously treated with geldanamycin (ga) and lc, or
sequentially with a brief preconditioning heat shock (hs) and
then lc (fig. 8). ga binds to an atp site on hsp90 and blocks its
interaction with hs factor 1, promoting its activation and the
synthesis of hsps (muchowski and wacker, 2005). both
approaches lead to a robust increase in the steady-state levels of
hsp70, while the levels of calnexin are unaltered (fig. 8a). a 16-h
treatment with ga (250 nm) elevates the levels of hsp70 by ~7-
fold (fig. 8a, left panel). similarly, after a brief hs treatment
(allen et al., 2004), hsp70 expression is transiently increased,
peaking at 8 h (fig. 8a, right panel). sixteen hours after hs,
hsp70 levels remain slightly elevated, as compared to control.
to test the effects of elevated hsps on pmp22 aggresome
formation, scs were simultaneously treated with ga (250 nm) and
lc for 16 h (fig. 8b). in contrast to proteasome inhibition alone
(fig. 5a), when ga is included (lc + ga), most scs do not form
aggregates. in a fraction of the cells, a condensation of pmp22
around the nucleus is seen (arrows), which were considered as
aggregates based on co-staining with ubiquitin (not shown) and
diameter larger than 1 μm. these aggregates however are less
defined than those formed after proteasome inhibition alone (fig.
5a). similar results are observed when the cells are preconditioned
with hs (fig. 8b, lc + hs). furthermore, the average size of the
aggregates formed (arrows) is reduced ~3-fold (p < 0.0001). the
arrowhead denotes an example of a cluster of small pmp22
aggregates (<1 μm) that are ubiquitin-negative (not shown). both
aggregates and cell death were absent in cells subjected to hs or
ga alone and allowed to recover for 16 h without proteasome
inhibition (fig. 8b, insets). quantification of three independent
experiments reveals that ga-treatment or hs preconditioning
significantly reduces the formation of protein aggregates in
proteasome-inhibited cells (fig. 8c). while ga is more effective
in preventing the formation of pmp22 aggregates, as compared to
hs (p < 0.005), extended exposure of cells to this compound is
known to be toxic (miyata, 2005). therefore, to explore the effects
elevated of hs proteins in combination with enhanced autophagy,
cells were first exposed to hs preconditioning followed by
proteasome inhibition under starvation conditions (fig. 8d).
fig. 7. heat shock proteins associate with pmp22 aggresomes. (a) the association of ubiquitin (ub, red) with hsp70 (green), or with pmp22 (green) (inset,
top row) was determined by double labeling scs after treatment with lc or dmso (16 h). arrows denote the co-localization of hsp70 and ubiquitin in
aggresomes. arrowheads point at cells that contain small ubiquitin-positive aggregates, but hsp70 levels remained low, similar to dmso control (inset). (b)
the small chaperones, αb-crystallin (αb-cryst, red) and hsp40 (red) are recruited to pmp22 aggresomes (green). the αb-cryst inset shows the chaperone
mainly around a pmp22 aggresome. the arrow points at hsp40-like staining at the centrosome (b, inset in right panel). nuclei are visualized by hoechst
stain  (blue).  scale  bars:  10  μm.
j. fortun et al. / neurobiology of disease 25 (2007) 252–265
261
fig. 8. enhancement of hsp expression hinders aggresome formation. (a) the levels of hsp70, calnexin (cnx) and tubulin or actin were determined by western
blots in total lysates (20 μg/lane) of untreated (c), ga-treated (16 h), or hs preconditioned (hs) cells, followed by the indicated chases at 37°c (0–16 h). (b) the
localization of pmp22 after each specified treatment (lc + ga; lc + hs) was monitored by immunostaining. arrows point at remaining pmp22 aggregates with
larger than 1 μm in diameter and are included in the quantification as cells with aggregates. the arrowhead (lc + hs) indicates a cluster of small aggregates (less
than 1 μm) that are excluded in the quantification. scale bar: 10 μm. (c) the number of cells with aggregates was quantified in four independent experiments and
expressed as percentage of total cells (**p < 0.005). (d) the additive effect of hs and stv was investigated in three independent experiments. the number of cells
with aggregates was quantified and expressed as a percentage of total cells (**p < 0.005). n.s., no significance.
comparing the influence of enhanced autophagy or chaperones on
preventing protein aggregate formation, we found that these two
treatments are equally effective (p = 0.18). however, when the two
treatments are combined, the accumulation of misfolded pmp22 is
further reduced (p < 0.005). while hs preconditioning stimulates
autophagy, as measured by an increase in lc3 levels and lipidation
(data not shown), when 3-ma was included during the post-hs
treatments, the number of cells with aggregates remained the same
(p = 0.81). therefore, the effect of hs in hindering aggresome
formation is likely independent of macroautophagy, but could
possibly involve cma.
based on the results described here, a protective nature of
pmp22 aggregate formation can be proposed (fig. 9). aggresomes
may represent a link between proteasome overwhelming/saturation
(a) and the activation of autophagy (e), as a secondary degradation
mechanism to prevent
the accumulation of misfolded pmp22.
increasing the levels of hsps (f) adds to this protective response
and can further reduce aggregate formation by aiding protein re-
folding and trafficking, and/or alternate degradative mechanisms.
discussion
cytosolic protein aggregates form when the quality control
mechanisms of the cell fail to ensure the folding and/or degradation
of proteins (goldberg, 2003). such aggregates are commonly
found in neurodegenerative disorders and often associate with
malfunction of the proteasome (keller et al., 2000; waelter et al.,
2001; mcnaught et al., 2003; kabashi et al., 2004; fortun et al.,
262
j. fortun et al. / neurobiology of disease 25 (2007) 252–265
autophagosomes were detected in scs of neuropathic mice based
on pmp22 overexpression (fortun et al., 2006). the studies
detailed above suggest a cellular response by which, autophagy is
activated upon degradative failure of the proteasome to maintain
cellular homeostasis and prevent the accumulation of potentially
harmful protein aggregates.
indeed, a relationship between
degradation pathways has been reported previously, as proteasome
inhibition resulted in enhanced macroautophagy (ding et al., 2003;
iwata et al., 2005). the signal behind this compensatory
mechanism is yet uncertain; however, the formation of protein
aggregates could represent the missing link. recent studies have
suggested a mechanism for the activation of autophagy by protein
aggregates, based on a loss of function of mtor (mammalian
target of rapamycin) (ravikumar et al., 2004). although this event
may result in the activation of autophagy, it is not yet known how
the inclusions are recognized by the autophagic–lysosomal system.
aggresomes are often surrounded by a vimentin cage (johnston et
al., 1998; notterpek et al., 1999), a factor that is poorly studied, but
might have important consequences aside from being a structural
constraint. in this regard, previous studies with internalized viral
proteins, or microinjected purified proteins, suggested the
existence of a sequestration site for protein aggregates in tight
association with intermediate filaments at perinuclear regions, as a
necessary step preceding autophagic–lysosomal degradation (earl
et al., 1987; doherty et al., 1987).
the studies mentioned above and described here (figs. 1–4)
show that the aggregation of undegraded proteasome substrates is
associated with the induction of an endogenous autophagic
response by the cells. in light of these results, why do aggresomes
form despite the activation of autophagy? one possibility is that
the removal of misfolded proteins by autophagy is insufficient to
prevent the formation of aggresomes. alternatively, since lacta-
cystin has been shown to inhibit the activity of human platelet
lysosomal cathepsin a-like enzyme at ph 5.5 (ostrowska et al.,
1997), lysosomal degradation might be incomplete. nonetheless,
we obtained similar results in scs from neuropathic mice bearing
spontaneous aggregates in the absence of proteasome inhibition, or
when epoxomicin instead of lactacystin was used, casting doubts
on this possibility. additionally, when autophagy is experimentally
enhanced by amino acid and serum deprivation, the formation of
de novo aggresomes and the accumulation of proteasomal
substrates are hindered. pulse labeling experiments indicate that
this effect is not due to a generalized depression in new protein
synthesis, as the incorporation of 35s-methionine/cysteine, was
similar among cells incubated in control medium or under lc + stv
conditions for 16 h (p = 0.44).
how does experimental activation of autophagy prevent the
accumulation of misfolded pmp22? aggresome assembly is a
multi-step process, by which small aggregates throughout the cell
are transported along microtubules towards the centrosome, where
they form the final inclusion (johnston et al., 1998; notterpek et
al., 1999). thus, it is likely that upon activation of autophagy,
small aggregates are engulfed within autophagosomes, reducing
the load of proteins being transported towards the centrosome. in
agreement, the enhancement of autophagy by rapamycin reduced
the accumulation of protein aggregates and cellular toxicity in
huntington’s disease models (ravikumar et al., 2002, 2004). the
role of autophagy in the degradation of ubiquitinated substrates is
also supported by the accumulation of ubiquitinated aggregates in
the liver of conditional atg7-deficient mice, which have defective
autophagy, but intact ups activity (komatsu et al., 2005). two
fig. 9. model for the protective role of aggresomes. pmp22 is a hydrophobic
tetraspan proteasome substrate. proteasome inhibition (a) in scs results in
the formation of small aggregates containing pmp22 and ubiquitin (ub) (b).
such aggregates are transported along the microtubules to the centrosome,
forming a central inclusion termed aggresome (c). aggresomes sequester
mtor, and associate with autophagosomes and autolysosomes (d). the
activation of the autophagic pathway (e) upon proteasome inhibition and
aggresome formation is a protective response of the cell to prevent the
accumulation of proteasome substrates. two mechanisms account for this
the clearance of the aggresome (e′) and the removal of small
effect:
aggregates (e″),
inclusion.
moreover, aggregates recruit heat shock proteins (hsps) that likely add to
this protective response (f).
thus hindering the formation of the final
2005, 2006). here we show that the accumulation of endogenous
pmp22 in aggresomes in neuropathic samples, or in response to
proteasome inhibition, results in the concomitant
induction of
autophagy. further enhancement of autophagy, or the levels of
hsps by experimental manipulations hampers the formation of
pmp22 aggresomes and prevents the accumulation of unrelated
ups substrates. these results suggest
that when proteasome
activity is compromised, cellular homeostasis is maintained by re-
routing proteasome substrates to an alternative pathway, namely
autophagic-mediated lysosomal degradation. the developments of
pharmacologic agents to stimulate these pathways therefore could
provide a therapeutic approach for protein misfolding disorders.
autophagic vacuoles have been observed within or adjacent to
the surface of cytoplasmic protein aggregates formed upon
proteasome inhibition (wojcik et al., 1996; harada et al., 2003;
rideout et al., 2004; iwata et al., 2005). additionally, autophago-
some formation and lc3 lipidation was reported in cells contain-
ing ubiquitinated inclusions as a result of oxidative stress (martinet
et al., 2004).
in the trj neuropathic model, we found the
recruitment of atg7 to pmp22 aggregates and autophagosomes
filled with electron dense material (fortun et al., 2003). similarly,
j. fortun et al. / neurobiology of disease 25 (2007) 252–265
263
recently established transgenic mouse lines further support the
essential role of autophagy in preventing the accumulation of
abnormal proteins (komatsu et al., 2006; hara et al., 2006). in
agreement, the simultaneous inhibition of the ups and autophagy
in our sc model is associated with more pronounced accumulation
of pmp22, as compared to lc treatment alone (fig. 5).
the consequences of inclusion body formation within the
cytoplasm are still debated. it has been proposed that the inclusion
bodies in neurodegenerative conditions are protective, whereas the
intermediate aggregates trigger neuronal toxicity by an unknown
cascade of events (muchowski and wacker, 2005). as cell death is
not a prominent feature of pmp22-associated neuropathies, and is
absent in our cell culture model (fortun et al., 2003), our results
support a protective role for protein aggregates. the lack of cellular
toxicity in our studies could be related to the endogenous protein
background rather than recombinant protein overexpression, and/or
the cell type used, as well as the shorter periods of proteasome
inhibition and autophagy stimulation. it is also feasible to speculate
that
the collapsed vimentin cage around pmp22 aggresomes
(notterpek et al., 1999) prevents the mobility of proteins, whereas
small aggregates are free to associate with additional molecules.
indeed, small pmp22 aggregates could be detrimental for scs by
providing a core for trapping other ubiquitinated substrates, based
on specific, or hydrophobic protein–protein interactions (fortun et
al., 2005). although we did not detect sc death in the time frame
used for proteasome inhibition (16 h) or in the neuropathic models
(fortun et al., 2003, 2006), it is possible that pmp22 aggregates
could lead to toxicity if not eliminated by autophagy.
in addition to autophagy, other events might be activated to
prevent
the accumulation of aggregates and the disruption of
cellular homeostasis. a common response to proteasome
inhibition and formation of aggregates is the increase in the
expression of molecular chaperones (muchowski and wacker,
2005). proteasome impairment
in scs overexpressing wt and
mutant pmp22s is associated with the elevation of hsps and
their recruitment to aggresomes (ryan et al., 2002). hsps are
also recruited to aggregates of the endogenous pmp22 (fig. 7).
the reason for this event is uncertain, but it might involve the
refolding and/or
the misfolded proteins for
degradation (muchowski and wacker, 2005). indeed, the kinetics
of association and dissociation of hsp70 with polyglutamine
protein aggregates is fast and similar to the rate for the folding
of thermally denatured substrates, suggestive of an active role in
the refolding of the aggregate (kim et al., 2002). on the other
the protection observed in drosophila models of
hand,
parkinson’s and polyglutamine expansion diseases due to the
elevation of hsps is not accompanied by a reduction in the
number of
(kazemi-esfarjani and benzer, 2002;
auluck et al., 2002).
the targeting of
inclusions
a protective role for chaperones in preventing the accumulation
of misfolded proteins is supported by the present study. the
formation of pmp22 aggresomes is hindered by a preconditioning
hs or ga treatment, likely due to the enhancement of cytoplasmic
molecular chaperones. preventing the formation and/or aiding the
refolding of small aggregates before the assembly of a large
inclusion can explain this result. in culture models of hsp40 and/or
hsp70 overexpression,
the intracellular aggregation of several
unrelated proteins was also suppressed (cummings et al., 1998;
stenoien et al., 1999; dul et al., 2001; abu-baker et al., 2003). in
our model, ga treatment, as compared to hs, was more effective
in preventing lc-induced aggresome formation, likely because of
the sustained expression of hsps over time. the effects of ga on
hindering aggresome formation does not correlate with a
pronounced reduction in the steady-state levels of ubiquitinated
substrates however (not shown), suggesting that the action of ga
may be based on the physical disassembly of the aggregates by
chaperones and/or promoting the trafficking of pmp22 to the
plasma membrane. alternatively, given the various hsp90 sub-
strates and the different processes in which they are involved with,
including signal transduction and cell cycle regulation (neckers,
2002), ga treatment may influence unknown factors of protein
aggregation. nonetheless, as judged from anti-lc3 western blots
(data not shown) ga treatment does not appear to stimulate
macroautophagy. additionally, as pmp22 lacks a kferq-like
targeting motif for cma (majesky and dice, 2004), the observed
benefits of ga treatment are likely independent from effects on
cma.
based on the results described here, we propose a model
where the formation of aggresomes is a protective response of
the cell that concentrates misfolded proteins in a central location
to activate an autophagic response (fig. 9). this model entails
that
the monomeric pmp22 is turned-over by the proteasome
(ryan et al., 2002), whereas the aggregated forms resulting
from proteasome inhibition or saturation, are degraded by the
autophagic–lysosomal pathway. concomitant with the reduction
in aggregates within the cells,
the levels of slow migrating
ubiquitinated substrates and of an unrelated proteasome reporter
are diminish. this suggests that substrates originally tagged for
proteasomal degradation, upon inhibition of this system, are re-
routed for breakdown within lysosomes through activation of
autophagy. an interaction between the two degradative path-
ways is not specific for pmp22, but rather appears to represent
a general response of cells, as suggested by studies with other
aggregation-prone proteins, such as wt α-synuclein and its a53t
or a30p mutants (tofaris et al., 2001; webb et al., 2003;
rideout et al., 2004; iwata et al., 2005). based on our results,
we also propose that the chaperone system is activated to aid in
the refolding of pmp22 and dissolution of small aggregates.
acknowledgments
the authors wish to thank debbie akin for technical assistance
with the ultrastructural studies and n. mizushima (tokyo
metropolitan institute of medical science, tokyo, japan) and
t. yoshimori (national institute of genetics, mishima, japan) for
providing the gfp-lc3 plasmid. these studies were supported by
the national muscular dystrophy association and the nih-ninds
(ln) and the nih-nci (wad).
references
abu-baker, a., messaed, c., laganiere, j., gaspar, c., brais, b., rouleau,
g.a., 2003. involvement of the ubiquitin–proteasome pathway and
molecular chaperones in oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy. hum.
mol. genet. 12 (20), 2609–2623.
allen, t.a., von kaenel, s., goodrich, j.a., kugel, j.f., 2004. the sine-
encoded mouse b2 rna represses mrna transcription in response to
heat shock. nat. struct. mol. biol. 11 (9), 816–821.
auluck, p.k., chan, h.y., trojanowski, j.q., lee, v.m., bonini, n.m., 2002.
chaperone suppression of alpha-synuclein toxicity in a drosophila
model for parkinson's disease. science 295 (5556), 865–868.
bence, n.f., sampat, r.m., kopito, r.r., 2001. impairment of the
264
j. fortun et al. / neurobiology of disease 25 (2007) 252–265
ubiquitin–proteasome system by protein aggregation. science 292,
1552–1555.
ciechanover, a., brundin, p., 2003. the ubiquitin proteasome system in
neurodegenerative diseases: sometimes the chicken, sometimes the egg.
neuron 40 (2), 427–446.
colby, j., nicholson, r., dickson, k.m., orfali, w., naef, r., suter, u.,
snipes, g.j., 2000. pmp22 carrying the trembler or trembler-j
mutation is intracellularly retained in myelinating schwann cells.
neurobiol. dis. 7, 561–573.
cummings, c.j., reinstein, e., sun, y., antalffy, b., jiang, y.,
ciechanover, a., orr, h.t., beaudet, a.l., zoghbi, h.y., 1998.
chaperone suppression of aggregation altered subcellular proteasome
localization implying protein misfolding in sca1. nat. genet. 19,
148–154.
dantuma, n.p., heessen, s., lindsten, k., jellne, m., masucci, m.g., 2000.
short-lived green fluorescent proteins for quantifying ubiquitin/
proteasome-dependent proteolysis in living cells. nat. biotechnol. 18,
538–543.
ding, q., dimaguya, e., martin, s., bruce-keller, a.j., nukula, v., cuervo,
a.m., keller, n., 2003. characterization of chronic low level
proteasome inhibition on neuronal homeostasis. j. neurochem. 86,
489–497.
doherty, f.j., wassell, j.a., mayer, r.j., 1987. a putative protein-
sequestration site involving intermediate filaments for protein
degradation by autophagy. studies with microinjected purified
glycolytic enzymes in 3t3-l1 cells. biochem. j. 241 (3), 793–800.
dorn, b.r., dunn jr., w.a., progulske-fox, a., 2001. porphyromonas
gingivalis traffics to autophagosomes in human coronary artery
endothelial cells. infect. immun. 69 (9), 5698–5708.
dul, j.l., davis, d.p., williamson, e.k., stevens, f.j., argon, y., 2001.
hsp70 and antifibrillogenic peptides promote the degradation and inhibit
intracellular aggregation of amyloidogenic light chains. j. cell biol. 152
(4), 705–715.
d'urso, d., prior, r., greiner-petter, r., gabreels-festen, a.a., muller,
h.w., 1998. overloaded endoplasmic reticulum–golgi compartments,
a possible pathomechanism of peripheral neuropathies caused by
mutations of the peripheral myelin protein pmp22. j. neurosci. 18 (2),
731–740.
earl, r.t., mangiapane, e.h., billett, e.e., mayer, r.j., 1987. a putative
protein-sequestration site involving intermediate filaments for protein
degradation by autophagy. studies with transplanted sendai-viral
envelope proteins in htc cells. biochem. j. 241 (3), 809–815.
fortun, j., dunn jr., w.a., joy, s., li, j., notterpek, l., 2003. emerging role
for autophagy in the removal of aggresomes in schwann cells.
j. neurosci. 23, 10672–10680.
fortun, j., li, j., go, j., fenstermaker, a., fletcher, b.s., notterpek, l.,
2005. impaired proteasome activity and accumulation of ubiquitinated
substrates in a hereditary neuropathy model. j. neurochem. 92,
1531–1541.
fortun, j., go, j.c., li, j., amici, s.a., dunn jr., w.a., notterpek, l., 2006.
alterations in degradative pathways and protein aggregation in a
neuropathy model based on pmp22 overexpression. neurobiol. dis. 22
(1), 153–164.
goldberg, a.l., 2003. protein degradation and protection against misfolded
or damaged proteins. nature 426 (6968), 895–899.
groll, m., clausen, t., 2003. molecular shredders: how proteasomes fulfill
their role. curr. opin. struct. biol. 13 (6), 665–673.
hara, t., nakamura, k., matsui, m., yamamoto, a., nakahara, y., suzuki-
migishima, r., yokoyama, m., mishima, k., saito, i., okano, h.,
mizushima, n., 2006. suppression of basal autophagy in neural cells
causes neurodegenerative disease in mice. nature 441, 885–889.
harada, m., kumemura, h., omary, m.b., kawaguchi, t., maeyama, n.,
hanada, s., taniguchi, e., koga, h., suganuma, t., ueno, t., sata, m.,
2003. proteasome inhibition induces inclusion bodies associated with
intermediate filaments and fragmentation of the golgi apparatus. exp.
cell res. 288 (1), 60–69.
microtubules are required for autophagic degradation of aggregated
huntington. j. biol. chem. 280 (48), 40282–40292.
johnston, j.a., ward, c.l., kopito, r.r, 1998. aggresomes: a cellular
response to misfolded proteins. j. cell biol. 143, 1883–1898.
kabashi, e., agar, j.n., taylor, d.m., minotti, s., durham, h.d., 2004.
focal dysfunction of the proteasome: a pathogenic factor in a mouse
model of amyotrophic lateral
j. neurochem. 89,
1325–1335.
sclerosis.
kabeya, y., mizushima, n., ueno, t., yamamoto, a., kirisako, t., noda, t.,
kominami, e., ohsumi, y., yoshimori, t., 2000. lc3, a mammalian
homologue of yeast apg8p, is localized in autophagosome membranes
after processing. embo j. 1 (22(17)), 4577.
kazemi-esfarjani, p., benzer, s., 2002. suppression of polyglutamine
toxicity by a drosophila homolog of myeloid leukemia factor 1. hum.
mol. genet. 11 (21), 2657–2672.
keller, j.n., hanni, k.b., markerbery, w.r., 2000. impaired proteasome
function in alzheimer's disease. j. neurochem. 75, 436–439.
kim, s., nollen, e.a.a., kitagawa, k., bindokas, v.p., morimoto, r.i.,
2002. polyglutamine aggregates are dynamic. nat. cell biol. 4,
826–831.
klionsky, d.j., emr, s.d., 2000. autophagy as a regulated pathway of
cellular degradation. science 290 (5497), 1717–1721.
komatsu, m., waguri, s., ueno, t., iwata, j., murata, s., tanida, i., ezaki,
j., mizushima, n., ohsumi, y., uchiyama, y., kominami, e., tanaka,
k., chiba, t., 2005. impairment of starvation-induced and constitutive
autophagy in atg7-deficient mice. j. cell biol. 169 (3), 425–434.
komatsu, m., waguri, s., chiba, t., murata, s., iwata, j., tanida, i., ueno,
t., koike, m., uchiyama, y., kominami, e., tanaka, k., 2006. loss of
autophagy in the central nervous system causes neurodegeneration in
mice. nature 441, 880–884.
lenk, s.e., dunn jr., w.a., trausch, j.s., ciechanover, a., schwartz, a.l.,
1992. ubiquitin-activating enzyme, e1, is associated with maturation of
autophagic vacuoles. j. cell biol. 118 (2), 301–308.
majesky, a.e., dice, j.f., 2004. mechanisms of chaperone-mediated
autophagy. int. j. biochem. cell biol. 36 (12), 2435–2444.
martinet, w., de bie, m., schrijvers, d.m., de meyer, g.r., herman,
a.g., kockx, m.m., 2004. 7-ketocholesterol
induces protein
ubiquitination, myelin figure formation, and light chain 3 processing
in vascular smooth muscle cells. arterioscler., thromb., vasc. biol. 24
(12), 2296–2301.
mclean, p.j., klucken, j., shin, y., hyman, b.t., 2004. geldanamycin
induces hsp70 and prevents α-synuclein aggregation and toxicity in
vitro. biochem. biophys. res. commun. 321, 665–669.
mcnaught, k.s., belizaire, r., isacson, o., jenner, p., olanow, c.w., 2003.
altered proteasome function in sporadic parkinson's disease. exp.
neurol. 179, 38–46.
muchowski, p.j., wacker, j.l., 2005. modulation of neurodegeneration by
molecular chaperones. nat. rev., neurosci. 6 (1), 11–22.
munafo, b.d., colombo, m.i., 2001. a novel assay to study autophagy:
regulation of autophagosome vacuole size by amino acid deprivation.
j. cell sci. 114, 3619–3629.
naef, r., suter, u., 1999. impaired intracellular trafficking is a common
disease mechanism of pmp22 point mutations in peripheral
neuropathies. neurobiol. dis. 6 (1), 1–14.
neckers, l., 2002. hsp90 inhibitors as novel cancer chemotherapeutic
agents. trends mol. med. 8 (4 suppl.), s55–s61.
notterpek, l., snipes, g., shooter, e.m., 1997. upregulation of
the endosomal–lysosomal pathway in the trembler-j neuropathy.
j. neurosci. 17 (11), 4190–4200.
notterpek, l., ryan, m.c., tobler, a.r., shooter, e.m., 1999. pmp22
implications for cmt1a pathology.
accumulation in aggresomes:
neurobiol. dis. 6, 450–460.
ostrowska, h., wojcik, c., omura, s., worowski, k., 1997. lactacystin, a
specific inhibitor of the proteasome, inhibits human platelet lysosomal
cathepsin a-like enzyme. biochem. biophys. res. commun. 234 (3),
729–732.
iwata, a., riley, b.e., johnston, j.a., kopito, r.r., 2005. hdac6 and
pareek, s., notterpek, l., snipes, g.j., naef, r., sossin, w., laliberte, j.,
j. fortun et al. / neurobiology of disease 25 (2007) 252–265
265
iacampo, s., suter, u., shooter, e.m., murphy, r.a., 1997. neurons
promote the translocation of peripheral myelin protein 22 into myelin.
j. neurosci. 17, 7754–7762.
ravikumar, b., duden, r., rubinsztein, d.c., 2002. aggregate-prone
proteins with polyglutamine and polyalanine expansions are degraded
by autophagy. hum. mol. genet. 11, 1107–1117.
ravikumar, b., vacher, c., berger, z., davies, j.e., luo, s., oroz, l.g.,
scaravilli, f., easton, d.f., duden, r., o'kane, c.j., rubinsztein, d.c.,
2004. inhibition of mtor induces autophagy and reduces toxicity of
polyglutamine expansions in fly and mouse models of huntington
disease. nat. genet. 36 (6), 585–595.
rideout, h.j., lang-rollin,
i., stefanis, l., 2004.
involvement of
inclusions. int. j.
macroautophagy in the dissolution of neuronal
biochem. cell biol. 36 (12), 551–2562.
ryan, m.c., shooter, e.m., notterpek, l., 2002. aggresome formation in
neuropathy models based on peripheral myelin protein 22 mutations.
neurobiol. dis. 10, 109–118.
snipes, g.j., suter, u., welcher, a.a., shooter, e.m., 1992. characterization
of a novel peripheral nervous system myelin protein (pmp-22/sr13).
j. cell biol. 117, 225–238.
stenoien, d.l., cummings, c.j., adams, h.p., mancini, m.g., patel, k.,
demartino, g.n., marcelli, m., weigel, n.l., mancini, m.a., 1999.
polyglutamine-expanded androgen receptors form aggregates that
sequester heat shock proteins, proteasome components and src-1,
and are suppressed by the hdj-2 chaperone. hum. mol. genet. 8 (5),
731–741.
tanida, i., ueno, t., kominami, e., 2004. lc3 conjugation system in
mammalian autophagy. int. j. biochem. cell biol. 36, 2503–2518.
tobler, a.r., notterpek, l., naef, r., taylor, v., suter, u., shooter, e.m.,
1999. transport of trembler-j mutant peripheral myelin protein 22 is
blocked in the intermediate compartment and affects the transport of the
wild-type protein by direct interaction. j. neurosci. 19, 2027–2036.
tobler, a.r., liu, n., mueller, l., shooter, e.m., 2002. differential
aggregation of the trembler and trembler j mutants of peripheral myelin
protein 22. proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 99, 483–488.
tofaris, g.k., layfield, r., spillantini, m.g., 2001. alpha-synuclein
metabolism and aggregation is linked to ubiquitin-independent
degradation by the proteasome. febs lett. 509 (1), 22–26.
waelter, s., boeddrich, a., lurz, r., scherzinger, e., lueder, g., lehrach,
h., wanker, e.e., 2001. accumulation of mutant huntington fragments
in aggresome-like inclusion bodies as a result of insufficient protein
degradation. mol. biol. cell 12, 1393–1407.
webb, j.l., ravikumar, b., atkins, j., skepper, j.n., rubinsztein, d.c.,
2003. alpha-synuclein is degraded by both autophagy and the
proteasome. j. biol. chem. 278 (27), 25009–25013.
wojcik, c., scroeter, d., wilk, s., lamprecht, j., paweletz, n., 1996.
ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis centers in hela cells: indication from
studies of an inhibitor of
the
proteasome. eur. j. cell biol. 71, 311–318.
the chymotrypsin-like activity of
young, p., suter, u., 2001. disease mechanisms and potential therapeutic
strategies in charcot–marie–tooth disease. brain res. brain res. rev.
36, 213–221.