point ofview
autophagy and neurodegeneration
congcong he and daniel j. klionsky*
life sciences institute, and departments of molecular, cellular and developmental biology and biological chemistry,
university of michigan, ann arbor, michigan 48109
r emoval of unwanted proteins is
crucial for the maintenance of
cellular homeostasis, especially in
postmitotic cells, such as neurons, since the
accumulation of abnormal proteins will not
be diluted by cell division. indeed,
misfolded protein aggregation characterizes
most neurodegenerative diseases (1).
eukaryotic cells primarily utilize two mecha-
nisms for protein clearance, the ubiquitin–
proteasome pathway and the autophagy–
lysosome pathway. compared with the
proteasome, which recognizes and
degrades protein substrates conjugated to a
polyubiquitin chain, autophagy is a less
selective clearance mechanism (figure 1).
autophagy is induced under conditions of
physiological stress, such as starvation.
autophagy also occurs at a basal level in
normal conditions. yet, little is known about
the physiological importance of constitutive
autophagy in nondividing cells. two recent
papers published in nature by hara et al. (2)
and komatsu et al (3). proposed a neuropro-
tective role of basal autophagy, based on
their striking ﬁndings that mice with auto-
phagy defects speciﬁcally in neurons
formed intracellular inclusions in the brain
and developed neurodegenerative symp-
toms, even without the expression of any
disease-causing, aggregate-prone proteins.
the autophagic process requires the
concerted coordination of proteins encoded
by atg (autophagy-related) genes (4). the
ubiquitous knockout of atg5 or atg7, two
essential genes for autophagy, causes early
postnatal lethality in mice. accordingly, hara
et al. (2) and komatsu et al. (3) used a
cre-loxp system to disrupt atg5 and atg7,
respectively, in the mouse central nervous
system (cns) by expressing cre recombi-
nase driven by a cns-speciﬁc promoter. this
approach allowed the authors to investigate
the role of autophagy in the cns in adult
animals and study long-term neurodegener-
ative progression. the neuron-speciﬁc,
autophagy-deﬁcient mice (referred to as
atg5−/− and atg7−/−) were born normally
but developed progressive behavioral
defects resembling those of aging-related
neurodegeneration in humans and mouse
models, for example, limb-clasping, tremor,
and ataxic walking pattern. the behavioral
phenotypes were accompanied by mass
death of purkinje cells and the presence of
ubiquitin-positive inclusion bodies in
certain regions of the brain including the
cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and hypo-
thalamus, which is thought to be the patho-
logical hallmark of neurodegeneration. in
addition, the autophagy-deﬁcient mice had
a dramatically decreased survival rate; most
animals died within 28 weeks. in atg7−/−
mice, polyubiquitinated proteins accumu-
lated and aggregated into inclusions
despite apparently normal proteasome
function, which suggests that basal
autophagy may be essential in clearing
some misfolded proteins that are beyond
the degradative capability of the protea-
some. thus, basal autophagy may be of
more biological importance than was previ-
ously recognized.
abstract autophagy mediates the bulk
degradation of cytosolic proteins and
organelles. recent studies using neuron-
speciﬁc knockout mouse models demon-
strate that autophagy deﬁciency leads to pro-
tein aggregation and neurodegeneration,
even in the absence of disease-related
aggregate-prone proteins.
*to whom correspondence
should be addressed.
e-mail: klionsky@umich.edu.
if defects in autophagy alone are suf-
published online may 19, 2006
ﬁcient to elicit protein aggregation
and degeneration in normal neurons
10.1021/cb600182h ccc: $33.50
© 2006 by american chemical society
www.acschemicalbiology.org
vol.1 no.4 • acs chemical biology
211
figure 1. schematic representation of autophagy in a mammalian cell. a portion of cytosol
destined for degradation is sequestered in a double-membrane vesicle termed an
autophagosome, by elongation of a small pre-autophagosome membrane structure that
derives from an unknown origin. the autophagosome then fuses with the lysosome to form
an autolysosome. the inner vesicle is degraded by resident hydrolases together with
its cargoes.
(figure 2, panel a), it is interesting to
consider cells that are burdened with
aggregate-prone proteins related to human
diseases, for example, ␣-synuclein and
expanded polyglutamine proteins. in a line
of inducible transgenic mice, neurodegener-
ation could be promisingly reversed when
the expression of the harmful protein is shut
off (5). this observation implies a protective
role of protein clearance. increasing
evidence indicates autophagy is actively
involved in this process (6, 7). for example,
chemical inhibition of autophagy at the
autophagosome formation or autophago-
some–lysosome fusion stages is associated
with enhanced protein aggregation and
death in cell models (8). conversely, rapa-
mycin, a chemical inducer of autophagy,
reduces aggregate formation and improves
behavioral tasks in transgenic animal
models (9, 10).
recent studies suggest that the cytosolic
early protein species (monomer or oligomer)
in the aggregation process, rather than the
inclusion itself, are the main source of
toxicity (1, 11). in atg5−/− neurons and
hepatocytes, inclusions formed after
diffuse-ubiquitinated proteins had accumu-
lated to a high level. this observation
supports the idea that inclusions may be a
consequence rather than the cause of
pathogenesis. the other intriguing hypoth-
esis that stems from this ﬁnding is that
autophagy may protect against neurode-
figure 2. hypothetical models of clearance
mechanisms of normal proteins and disease-
related aggregate-prone proteins. a) in normal
neurons, misfolded proteins are ubiquitinated
and actively degraded by proteasomes. the
basal level of autophagy also constitutively
degrades excess or misfolded proteins,
maintaining a favorable environment for
various cellular functions. in the neurons of
atg5ⴚ/ⴚ or atg7ⴚ/ⴚ mice where autophagy is
blocked, an elevated level of misfolded
proteins accumulates in the cell and forms
inclusions, leading to neurodegeneration and
cell death. b) in patients or transgenic
animals with neurodegenerative disorders,
aggregate-prone proteins, for example,
expanded polyglutamine proteins, express
and adopt aberrant structures that easily
aggregate into inclusions that are highly
resistant to proteases. autophagy may be a
primary mechanism by which cells clear diffuse
monomeric or oligomeric forms of aggregate-
prone proteins, although a role for the
proteasome in clearance cannot be ruled out.
normal cellular
protein
atg5-/- or atg7-/-
misfolded protein
proteasome
autophagy
inclusion
aggregate-prone protein
inclusion
212
vol.1 no.4 • 211–213 • 2006
he and klionsky
www.acschemicalbiology.org
proteasome
autophagy
point ofview
8. ravikumar, b., duden, r., and rubinsztein, d. c.
(2002) aggregate-prone proteins with poly-
glutamine and polyalanine expansions are
degraded by autophagy. hum. mol. genet.
11, 1107–1117.
9. ravikumar, b., vacher, c., berger, z., davies, j. e.,
luo, s., oroz, l. g., scaravilli, f., easton, d. f.,
duden, r., o’kane, c. j., and rubinsztein, d. c.
(2004) inhibition of mtor induces autophagy and
reduces toxicity of polyglutamine expansions in ﬂy
and mouse models of huntington disease. nat.
genet. 36, 585–595.
10. berger, z., ravikumar, b., menzies, f. m., oroz,
l. g., underwood, b. r., pangalos, m. n., schmitt,
i., wullner, u., evert, b. o., o’kane, c. j., and
rubinsztein, d. c. (2006) rapamycin alleviates
toxicity of different aggregate-prone proteins.
hum. mol. genet. 15, 433–442.
11. arrasate, m., mitra, s., schweitzer, e. s., segal, m. r.,
and finkbeiner, s. (2004) inclusion body formation
reduces levels of mutant huntingtin and the risk of
neuronal death. nature 431, 805–810.
12. webb, j. l., ravikumar, b., atkins, j., skepper, j. n.,
and rubinsztein, d. c. (2003) ␣-synuclein is
degraded by both autophagy and the proteasome.
j. biol. chem 278, 25009–25013.
13. ross, c. a., and pickart, c. m. (2004) the ubiquitin-
proteasome pathway in parkinson’s disease
and other neurodegenerative diseases.
trends cell biol. 14, 703–711.
14. martin-aparicio, e., yamamoto, a., hernandez, f.,
hen, r., avila, j., and lucas, j. j. (2001) proteasomal-
dependent aggregate reversal and absence of cell
death in a conditional mouse model of hunting-
ton’s disease. j. neurosci. 21, 8772–8781.
15. bence, n. f., sampat, r. m., and kopito, r. r. (2001)
impairment of the ubiquitin-proteasome system by
protein aggregation. science 292, 1552–1555.
16. bennett, e. j., bence, n. f., jayakumar, r., and
kopito, r. r. (2005) global impairment of the
ubiquitin-proteasome system by nuclear or cytoplas-
mic protein aggregates precedes inclusion body
formation. mol. cell 17, 351–365.
17. venkatraman, p., wetzel, r., tanaka, m., nukina, n.,
and goldberg, a. l. (2004) eukaryotic proteasomes
cannot digest polyglutamine sequences and re-
lease them during degradation of polyglutamine-
containing proteins. mol. cell 14, 95–104.
18. ross, c. a., and poirier, m. a. (2005) opinion: what
is the role of protein aggregation in neurodegenera-
tion? nat. rev. mol. cell biol. 6, 891–898.
generation by reducing the level of poten-
tially toxic diffuse protein species rather
than the inclusions per se (figure 2,
panel b). in fact, the size of inclusions
usually exceeds that of typical mammalian
autophagosomes.
there is some controversy regarding the
ability of the proteasome to degrade these
amyloidogenic proteins (12–14). in some
diseases, the proteasomal function is
signiﬁcantly impaired in the presence of
aggregate-prone proteins (15, 16). in addi-
tion, it has been found that proteasomes are
unable to cleave within expanded poly-
glutamine sequences (17), which may result
in steric hindrance and inhibition of the
proteasome.
despite recent progress, there are many
open questions to be answered with regard
to misfolded protein clearance and neuro-
degeneration. for example, it is not clear if,
or how, the proteasome and autophagy
coordinate to accomplish the task of protein
quality control. in addition, we do not know
exactly the forms of aggregate-prone
proteins (diffuse or inclusion) degraded
through autophagy, or the molecular
components and mechanism of autophagic
degradation of these proteins. since it is
suggested that toxicity has been initiated
before aggregates are formed (18), it will be
helpful to have additional data that identify
the factors/pathways that regulate the clear-
ance of abnormal proteins before or during
early stages of the aggregation process, as
these may serve as potential therapeutic
targets in neurodegenerative disorders. the
studies by hara et al. (2) and komatsu et al.
(3) provide a direct causative connection
between impaired autophagy and neuro-
degeneration in the absence of genetic
mutations that predispose an individual to
disease and, thus, unveil a critical role of
basal autophagic clearance. neurons may
be especially sensitive to proteolytic stress
due to their quiescent state and highly
speciﬁc function. the neuron-speciﬁc,
autophagy-deﬁcient mouse models will be
useful in further investigating the role of
autophagy in neurological diseases, speciﬁ-
cally, in protection against misfolded
protein accumulation and aggregation.
acknowledgement: this article is dedi-
cated to the memory of cecile m. pickart.
references
1. ross, c. a., and poirier, m. a. (2004) protein aggrega-
tion and neurodegenerative disease. nat. med. 10
(suppl.), s10–s17.
2. hara, t., nakamura, k., matsui, m., yamamoto, a.,
nakahara, y., suzuki-migishima, r., yokoyama, m.,
mishima, k., saito, i., okano, h., and mizushima,
n. (2006) suppression of basal autophagy in
neural cells causes neurodegenerative disease
in mice. nature, published online april 19,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature04724.
3. komatsu, m., waguri, s., chiba, t., murata, s., iwata,
j. i., tanida, i., ueno, t., koike, m., uchiyama, y.,
kominami, e., and tanaka, k. (2006) loss of autoph-
agy in the central nervous system causes neuro-
degeneration in mice. nature, published online
april 19, http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature04723.
4. levine, b., and klionsky, d. j. (2004) develop-
ment by self-digestion: molecular mechanisms
and biological functions of autophagy. dev.
cell 6, 463–477.
5. yamamoto, a., lucas, j. j., and hen, r. (2000)
reversal of neuropathology and motor dysfunc-
tion in a conditional model of huntington’s dis-
ease. cell 101, 57–66.
6. bjorkoy, g., lamark, t., brech, a., outzen, h.,
perander, m., overvatn, a., stenmark, h., and jo-
hansen, t. (2005) p62/sqstm1 forms protein
aggregates degraded by autophagy and has a
protective effect on huntingtin-induced cell death.
j. cell biol. 171, 603–614.
7. qin, z. h., wang, y., kegel, k. b., kazantsev, a., apos-
tol, b. l., thompson, l. m., yoder, j., aronin, n., and
difiglia, m. (2003) autophagy regulates the pro-
cessing of amino terminal huntingtin fragments.
hum. mol. genet. 12, 3231–3244.
www.acschemicalbiology.org
vol.1 no.4 • 211–213 • 2006
213