biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1 – 22
www.elsevier.com/locate/bbacan
review
igf-i mediated survival pathways in normal and malignant cells
raushan t. kurmasheva, peter j. houghton ⁎
department of molecular pharmacology, st. jude children's research hospital, 332 n. lauderdale st., memphis, tn 38105-2794, usa
received 14 october 2005; received in revised form 23 may 2006; accepted 25 may 2006
available online 7 june 2006
abstract
the type-i and -ii insulin-like growth factors (igf-i, ii) are now established as survival- or proliferation-factors in many in vitro systems. of
note igfs provide trophic support for multiple cell types or organ cultures explanted from various species, and delay the onset of programmed cell
death (apoptosis) through the mitochondrial (intrinsic pathway) or by antagonizing activation of cytotoxic cytokine signaling (extrinsic pathway).
in some instances, igfs protect against other forms of death such as necrosis or autophagy. the effect of igfs on cell survival appears to be
context specific, being determined both by the cell origin (tissue specific) and the cellular stress that induces loss of cellular viability. in many
human cancers, there is a strong association with dysregulated igf signaling, and this association has been extensively reviewed recently. igf-
regulation is also disrupted in childhood cancers as a consequence of chromosomal translocations. igfs are implicated also in acute renal failure,
traumatic injury to brain tissue, and cardiac disease. this article focuses on the role of igfs and their cellular signaling pathways that provide
survival signals in stressed cells.
© 2006 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.
contents
introduction .
1.
igf-ir signaling .
2.
igfs as survival factors.
3.
igfs protecting against cellular stress .
4.
5. regulation of death-signaling proteins .
6.
igfs modulating signaling pathways in response to various cellular stresses .
serum-deprivation .
6.1.
cytokines.
6.2.
loss of substrate attachment .
6.3.
6.4. oxidative stress .
6.5. hypoxia/ischemia .
6.6. uv radiation .
6.7.
6.8.
6.9. anticancer drugs .
6.10. membrane hyperpolarization .
6.11. calcium influx .
6.12. glucose stress .
targeting igf-ir for cancer treatment .
7.
8. conclusions.
acknowledgments .
references .
ceramide .
fas/trail signaling .
. 2
. 2
. 2
. 3
. 4
. 5
. 6
. 6
. 7
. 8
. 9
. 10
. 10
. 10
. 11
. 13
. 14
. 14
. 14
. 15
. 16
. 16
⁎ corresponding author. tel.: +1 901 495 3440; fax: +1 901 495 4290.
e-mail address: peter.houghton@stjude.org (p.j. houghton).
0304-419x/$ - see front matter © 2006 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.bbcan.2006.05.003
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
1. introduction
the type-i and -ii insulin-like growth factors (igf-i, ii) are
now established as survival- or proliferation-factors in many in
vitro systems. of note igfs provide trophic support for multiple
cell types or organ cultures explanted from various species, and
delay the onset of programmed cell death (apoptosis) through
the mitochondrial
(intrinsic pathway) or by antagonizing
activation of cytotoxic cytokine signaling (extrinsic pathway).
in some instances igfs protect against other forms of death
such as necrosis or autophagy. the effect of igfs on cell
survival appears to be context specific, being determined both
by the cell origin (tissue specific) and the cellular stress that
induces loss of cellular viability. in many human cancers there is
a strong association with dysregulated igf signaling, and this
association has been extensively reviewed recently [1–19].
igf-regulation is also disrupted in childhood cancers as a
consequence of chromosomal translocations [20,21]. igfs are
implicated also in acute renal failure, traumatic injury to brain
tissue, and cardiac disease. this article focuses on the role of
igfs and their cellular signaling pathways that provide survival
signals in stressed cells.
2. igf-ir signaling
site-directed mutagenesis has been used to map specific
receptor functions, signaling pathways and phenotypes asso-
ciated with igf-ir signaling. domain-specific mutants of the
igf-ir β-subunit have been used to analyze the role of
specific tyrosines in the regulation of the invasive/metastatic
phenotype [22]. the results identified three types of receptor-
dependent
functions in this model. dna synthesis was
dependent only on an intact kinase domain (y-1131, y-1135,
and y-1136), whereas protection from apoptosis and anchor-
age-independent growth were dependent equally on the kinase
domain and y-1250/1251 signaling. migration and invasion
appeared to be dependent on kinase domain and enhanced
through y-1250/1251 signaling.
data support igf-ir mediated survival independent of irs-
1 and shc [23]. extensive studies from baserga's laboratory
[24–28] have used d32 murine hematopoeitic cells that lack
irs-1 and irs-2 to identify signaling pathways downstream of
igf-1r that are independent of irs proteins. upon withdrawal
of interleukin-3 (il-3), d32 cells undergo rapid apoptosis.
expression of wild type igf-1r allowed igf-1 rescue,
independent of phosphatidylinositol 3′ kinase (pi3k) whereas
mutant receptors lacking the catalytic domain tyrosines or
mutation in the atp binding site (k1003) failed to rescue. a
mutant that lacks the shc binding site (y950f) maintained
viability for a shorter period. mutations of the serine cluster
(s1280–1283), unique to the igf-1r, also abrogated the ability
of igf-1 to maintain viability for 48 h in the absence of il-3.
these mutational analyses demonstrated three major pathways
of igf-1r signaling that protected from il-3 withdrawal-
induced apoptosis. in the absence of irs proteins sustained
activation of erk1/2 appears largely dependent on y950, with
another pathway dependent on the serine cluster motif (s1280–
1283), probably in cooperation with 14-3-3 proteins. the latter
pathway results in translocation of raf-1 to mitochondria where
it can phosphorylate the proapoptotic protein bad. however, the
relationship between activation of erks and igf-1-mediated
survival is not absolute [24]. these pathways are not shared
with insulin receptor (ir) signaling. in the presence of irs-1,
the major pathway activated is via pi3k and akt. phos-
phorylation and inactivation of bad appears to be a common
target for each pathway, fig. 1.
a second approach to mapping receptor-transduced signal-
ing pathways has been the use of chimeric receptors. a receptor
comprised of the extracellular domain of the csf1 receptor and
intracellular domain of the ir has been used to map signaling
pathways downstream of ir. csf-1 stimulated glucose uptake,
mitogen-activated protein kinases, and irs-1-associated pi3k
in cells expressing the csf1r/ir, but not through a chimeric
receptor with a deletion of 12 amino acids from its
juxtamembrane domain (csf1r/irδ960) that was unable to
phosphorylate irs-1 and shc. however the csf1r/irδ960
chimera was as effective as the csf1r/ir in mediating csf-1
protection of cells from staurosporine-induced apoptosis. these
data indicate that
the anti-apoptotic effects of the insulin
receptor cytoplasmic domain can be mediated by signaling
pathways distinct from those requiring irs-1 and shc. in
contrast, mutant chimeras of trk/ir(y960f) or trk/igfir
(y950f)
failed to rescue from serum-starvation induced
apoptosis when stimulated with neurotrophin-3 [29]. data
from knockout mice also suggest
in
mediating igf-i protection under serum-starved conditions.
irs-1-deficient brown pre-adipocyte cell
lines showed a
significant decrease in response to igf-i protection from
apoptosis, whereas no changes were observed in the irs-2,
irs-3, or irs-4-deficient cells. pi3k activity was decreased and
akt phosphorylation was slightly reduced in these cells,
whereas phosphorylation of the transcription factors camp
response element-binding protein (creb) and fkhr by igf-1
and insulin was markedly reduced in irs-1-deficient cells. irs
proteins may therefore play differential roles in the anti-
apoptotic effects of igf-1 with irs-1 being predominant.
overexpression of irs-i in hep3b hepatoma cells led to
activation of both the pi3k and erk1/2 pathways and
conferred resistance to tgf-β-induced death [30].
irs-1 is important
3. igfs as survival factors
there are accumulating data from multiple systems that serum-
deprivation results in apoptosis, and that either igf-1 or -ii (as
well as other growth factors) can support survival, at least for a
limited period of time. in many systems igfs appear to play a
unique role in protection. early studies using il-3-dependent
hematopoietic cell lines showed that igf-1 could adequately
substitute and delay apoptosis when substituted for il-3 [31].
such results have been extended to such diverse models as
cortical neuron cultures, cerebellar granule cells, cultured fetal
ovaries and malignant cells from various species. thus the role of
igfs in supporting survival under growth factor deficient con-
ditions appears conserved in a wide range of cell types. indeed,
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
fig. 1. signaling pathways induced by ligand binding to igf-ir that lead to phosphorylation and inactivation of the proapoptotic protein bad. activation of irs-1
requires an active kinase function of igf-irβ, whereas y950 is required for shc binding and activation of the ras/mapk pathway. phosphorylation of s1283 appears
a requirement for binding 14-3-3 proteins that lead to translocation of raf-1 to the mitochondria where it can phosphorylate bad (adapted from [25]).
igf-mediated trophic support by stromal tissues may be common
in mammals [32]. constitutive activation of c-myc also drives
apoptosis under growth factor deprived conditions of growth [33],
where igf-1, and to a lesser extent igf-ii and pdgf rescued,
whereas egf, bfgf and bombesin had no effect in preventing
cell death.
importantly,
these studies showed that igf-i or pdgf-
mediated protection was not restricted to precommitment g1
cells. further, protection by igf-i, but to a lesser extent by
pdgf, was independent of protein synthesis, as igf-i provided
substantial protection against serum-withdrawal even in the
presence of the translation inhibitor cycloheximide. other
studies have confirmed that igfs can prevent cycloheximide
induced apoptosis in malignant and normal cell systems
[34,35]. translation inhibitors, such as cycloheximide, rapidly
activate mtor signaling, through an undefined pathway. this
leads to activation of s6k1 which may have either pro- or anti-
apoptotic activities. s6k1 can phosphorylate irs-1, which leads
to proteasome-mediated degradation, and it can phosphorylate
and inactivate the proapoptotic protein bad. potentially, under
these conditions igf-1 may mediate survival through an irs-
independent pathway described previously [25]. alternatively,
inhibitors of translation may activate akt through mtor in
the torc2 complex (j. zhan, p. houghton, unpublished data).
4. igfs protecting against cellular stress
while studies demonstrating the ability of igfs to support
viability during serum-deficient growth have been informative,
they do not shed light on the in vivo role of igfs in cell survival
under normal physiological or pathological conditions. igfs
protect mammalian cells from diverse stress-inducing insults in-
cluding cytotoxic cytokines, hypoxia–ischemia, oxidative stress,
and dna damage. in vivo studies support igfs in protecting
against ischemic or traumatic brain injury. endogenous igf-1
plays a significant role in recovery from insults such as hypoxia–
ischemia and that administration of igf-1 can actively ameliorate
damage. neurons and other cell types die hours or even days after
initial injury due to activation of the apoptotic program. fol-
lowing ischemic or traumatic brain injury igf-1 and its binding
proteins and receptors are intensely induced within damaged
brain regions, suggesting a possible role for igf-1 in the recovery
process. exogenous administration of igf-1 within a few hours
after brain injury is now established to be protective in both gray
and white matter and leads to improved somatic function [36–38].
igfs also support cell viability of rat retinal ganglial neurons or
chick olfactory neurons following denervation [39–41]. igfs
protect from acute renal failure caused by occlusion-reperfusion
or after ureteral obstruction in rats [42–45], or in cerulien-induced
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
pancreatitis [46], and partially protects against 5-fluorouracil-
induced mucositis in a rat model [47].
igfs have also demonstrated protective effects against specific
and indirect apoptosis-inducing stimuli in organotypic cultures,
primary cell cultures, 3d-cultures (spheroids) as well as in more
traditional monolayer culture with continuous cell lines. specific
death signals are transferred via death ligands, death receptors, and
their intracellular signaling pathways, while indirect signals
include a wide range of stimuli that potentially harm survival of
cells, and include intercalating drugs, irradiation or altered intra-
cellular signaling. thus, igf-i protected both isolated islets of
langerhans from the cytotoxic effects of exogenous interleukin-
1β (il-1β), tumor necrosis factor-α, (tnfα) and interferon-γ
(ifnγ) [48], and ins-1 pancreatic β cells [49] suggesting con-
cordance between the model systems. similarly igfs protected
from u.v.-b irradiation in primary cultures of human karatino-
cytes as well as continuous cultures [50,51] potentially allowing
more time for repair of u.v.-induced cyclobutane thymine dimers.
igfs also protect from apoptosis induced by overexpression of
protooncogenes [33,52], although igf-i potentiated c-myc-driven
apoptosis in human hepatoma cells [53]. igfs prevent apoptosis
mediated by p53 [54], nitric oxide [55,56], oxidative stress
induced by arachidonic acid or hydrogen peroxide [57–59]. igfs
also offer some protection against cancer chemotherapeutic
agents, ionizing radiation or their potential downstream effectors
(e.g. ceramide). the potential for stromal-cell-derived igfs to
protect is demonstrated by the observation that media from mg-
63 osteoblast-like cells protected pc-3 prostate carcinoma cells
from doxorubicin toxicity, or stromal cell protection of b cell
precursors from dexamethasone-induced apoptosis [60]. in
contrast, dexamethasone blocked igf-i rescue from apoptosis
induced by hyperosmotic stress in rat l6 myoblasts [61]. how-
ever, there are examples where igfs fail to protect, or even
enhance the cytotoxic activity of tnfα in prostate cancer cells
[62] or non-transformed murine cells [63,64]. conversely, tnfα
has been reported to inhibit igf-i-stimulated growth of rhab-
domyosarcoma cells [65]. similarly, although there are numerous
reports indicating the effect of igfs preventing etoposide- or
doxorubicin-induced apoptosis, there are exceptions [34,66]. the
ability of igfs to rescue cells from drug-induced apoptosis is
probably determined, in part, by the relative level of igf-i receptor
expression [67], and by the mechanism of cell death that is
induced. for example, in cortical neurons the calcium ionophore,
ionomycin, induces apoptosis at low concentration that is rescued
by igf-i, but at higher concentrations results in necrotic cell death
that
is not prevented by igfs [68]. nor did igf-i inhibit
excitotoxic stress-induced necrosis [69], whereas it did attenuate
myocyte necrosis in an in vivo model of non-occlusive coronary
artery constriction [70].
while the majority of data support a role for igfs in main-
taining cell viability in the face of stress induced by various
stimuli,
these data should be interpreted with some caution
regarding their physiological relevance. clearly, studies in vivo
that demonstrate the positive effect of igf administration in
ameliorating brain or coronary artery ischemia support an im-
portant physiological role. however, mere protection against
biochemical manifestations of apoptosis (caspase activation, or
dna fragmentation) may just reflect an altered pathway for
cellular death, rather than maintenance of proliferative or
clonogenic potential. for example, igf-i mediated protection
from ionizing radiation, as judged by dna fractionation, did not
correlate with clonogenic survival [71]. dna fragmentation as a
hallmark of apoptosis has also been challenged, as in cortical
neurons slowly triggered excitotoxicity occurs by necrosis with
dna fragmentation suggesting that interpreting internucleosomal
dna fragmentation in isolation as evidence for apoptosis may be
incorrect [69]. mccarthy et al. [72] concluded that in the process
of apoptosis induced by deregulated oncogenes, dna damage, or
pro-apoptotic proteins, caspases constitute part of the execution
machinery that is engaged after the point at which cells become
committed to die or can be rescued by survival factors. these cells
have lost proliferative potential and all eventually die by a process
involving cytoplasmic blebbing [72]. indeed it has been proposed
that apoptosis is not the main mechanism for the death of cancer
cells in response to common treatment regimens, and that if
clonogenic survival is used to assess killing then apoptosis and the
genes controlling it, appear to play little or no role in the sensitivity
of these cells to killing by anticancer drugs and radiation [73].
5. regulation of death-signaling proteins
igf-mediated effects on transcription or posttranslational mo-
dification of pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins have been reported
following serum-deprivation, and may provide the mechanism by
which igfs suppress apoptosis induced by either the cell-extrinsic
(which is activated by death cytokines such as tnfα), or by the
cell-intrinsic apoptotic pathways (which is activated after cellular
damage). bcl-2, caspase, or apaf families of proteins constitute
the core of apoptotic regulation. ligand binding to the igf-ir can
activate akt, which in turn phosphorylates bad. once
phosphorylated, bad can no longer bind bcl-xl or bcl-2,
allowing these proteins to exert their protective effect at the
mitochondrial
level, potentially by blocking the release of
cytochrome c, required for caspase activation [74]. the balance
between anti-apoptotic (bcl-2, bcl-x) and pro-apoptotic (bax,
bak, bad) proteins is important in determining if a given signal
results in apoptosis [75]. activation of either pathway (extrinsic or
intrinsic) results in increased activity of bad which links survival
signals to the mitochondrial cell death machinery [76,77]. in
vascular smooth muscle cells deprived of serum, igf-i stimulates
phosphorylation of bad by a pi3k-dependent pathway. more-
over, the proapoptotic effect of bad was attenuated by igf-i [78].
the analysis of a mutant bad (where inactivating phos-
phorylation sites are mutated) mice reveals that bad phosphor-
ylation attenuates death pathway signaling by raising the
threshold at which mitochondria release cytochrome c to induce
cell death, and that a primary function of bad phosphorylation is
to allow growth factors to block cell death induced by a variety
apoptotic stimuli [77]. in addition to posttranslational modifica-
tion of bad, igf-ir activation can regulate both pro- and apo-
ptotic proteins, as well as transcription factors leading to inhibition
of apoptosis. some of these pathways are summarized in fig. 2. in
baf-3 cells, il-3 and igf-1 both inhibit cell death under serum-
deprived conditions [79]. both factors were found to upregulate
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
fig. 2. igf-ir-mediated survival through transcriptional regulation. igf-ir signaling via irs-1, akt or map kinases (erk1/2, p38) positively regulates transcription of
antiapoptotic genes (red) and negatively regulates proapoptotic genes (green). igf-ir signaling regulates transcription factors that themselves regulate antiapoptotic programs.
bcl-x at the mrna and protein levels and protect from apoptosis
in the absence of protein synthesis. pi3k activation was involved
in the upregulation of bcl-x mrna induced by both il-3 and
igf-1, although of interest, pi3k activity was necessary only for
inhibition of apoptosis by igf-1 but not il-3. the protective effect
of igf-1 in pc12 cells is also associated with an up-regulation of
bcl-xl mrna and protein levels [80]. in il-3-dependent murine
myeloid progenitor cells serum-deprivation led to a time-
dependent reduction in the expression of bcl-2 associated with
an 8-fold increase in apoptosis after 24 h. igf-i and il-4
maintained 10-fold higher levels of bcl-2 than in il-3-deprived
cells. however, il-4 and igf-i do not change expression of bax,
although they maintain high levels of bcl-2/bax heterodimers
[81]. igf-i suppresses key elements of the intrinsic (mitochon-
drial) death pathway in cerebellar granule neurons. igf-i blocked
release of mitochondrial cytochrome c and the induction of the
bh3-only bcl-2 family member, bim (bcl-2 interacting mediator
of cell death), a mediator of bax-dependent cytochrome c release.
the suppression of bim expression by igf-i was associated with
inactivation of fkhrl1, a transcriptional regulator of bim. these
data suggest that igf-i signaling through akt promotes survival
by blocking the fkhrl1-dependent transcription of bim [82].
igf-i also strongly suppressed the pro-apoptotic bh3-only
protein bbc3 (bcl-2 binding component) mrna expression
suggesting that bbc3 is a common target in diverse cell death-
signaling pathways [54].
the t cell death-associated gene 51 (tdag51) has also been
suggested to play an important role in the anti-apoptotic effects of
igf-i [83]. tdag51 was identified by cdna microarray
analysis as a gene specifically induced by igf-i. igf-i stimulated
induction of tdag1 in nih-3t3 cells, which overexpress the
human igf-i receptor, is mediated through the p38 mapk
pathway and not the erk, jnk, or pi3k pathways. down-
regulation of tdag1 by sirna, reduced protein levels by ∼75%
and abolished the ability of igf-i to rescue cells from serum
starvation-induced apoptosis. exactly how tdag1 is involved in
the anti-apoptotic actions of igf-i remains to be elucidated.
6. igfs modulating signaling pathways in response to
various cellular stresses
the signaling pathways most frequently implicated in igf-
mediated survival signaling are represented in figs. 1 and 2. igf-i
or -ii binding to the igf-ir induces receptor phosphorylation,
recruitment and phosphorylation of irs-1 (or irs-2) resulting in
recruitment of p110, the catalytic subunit of pi3k, generation of
phosphoinositol
trisphosphate, and activation of pdk1, and
subsequently akt. akt appears to be a critical component of the
survival pathway, regulating the activities of components of the
apoptotic machinery including the forkhead (fkhr-l1) tran-
scription factor, bad, and glycogen synthase kinase 3β (gsk3β).
a second major pathway implicated in survival signaling results
from the recruitment of adaptor proteins to the activated igf-ir
resulting in ras signaling and activation of transcriptional
programs downstream of the extracellular receptor activated
kinases (erk-1, -2). in the absence of irs expression, binding of
14-3-3 to the igf-1r leads to a signaling pathway in which raf-1
is translocated to the mitochondria where it may phosphorylate
and inactivate bad.
the requirement for activation of pi3k or erk1/2 in
mediating igf-survival appears to be context specific depending
on the model system and the stress stimulus used. for example, in
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
3t3-l1 preadipocytes igf-i mediated survival under serum-
starvation conditions required both activation of pi3k and erk1/
2. in contrast, igf-i potentiation of tnfα induced apoptosis
required only activation of pi3k [63]. similarly, the mode of
death may impact whether igfs can protect. for example, in
cortical neurons, igf-i rescues only from apoptosis induced by
low concentrations of ionomycin [68].
6.1. serum-deprivation
although the effect of igfs in protecting from serum-
deprivation have been reported in numerous model systems,
relatively few studies have defined either the signaling pathways
activated, or the putative mechanism by which apoptosis is
prevented. igf-stimulation of the pi3k/akt pathway may be
essential for some systems [79,84–86] whereas in other models
pi3k signaling appears not to be essential for igf-mediated
survival [87–90]. the role of signaling through the erk1/2
pathway in igf-mediated survival also appears context specific.
in most studies the dependence on signaling through one pathway
or another has been determined by the ability of pi3k inhibitors
(notably wortmannin and ly294002) to prevent igf-mediated
rescue from serum-deprivation. wortmannin inhibits other
members of the pikk family (mtor, atr), so is not absolutely
specific. this agent also is highly unstable in culture medium,
hence it is important to demonstrate that pi3k signaling is indeed
inhibited during the time course of the rescue experiments,
particularly where the inhibitor does not prevent igf-stimulated
survival. similarly, demonstration of the erk1/2 pathway in
survival has predominantly used inhibitors of mek1 such as
pd98059. fortunately this agent is stable for several days under
culture conditions. in sensory dorsal root ganglion cells deprived
of nerve growth factor (ngf) in serum, igf-i mediated survival
was blocked by inhibitors of pi3k, but not by pd98059 [91]. in
human cd34+ early erythroid precursors multiple pathways
appear to be required for igf-mediated survival. although cell
proliferation was more related to simultaneous activation of jak-
stat and erk1/2, the effect on cell survival correlated with
activation of pi3k-akt, erk1/2 and jak-stat proteins [89]. in
non-small cell lung cancer cell lines amphiregullin combined with
igf-i strongly supports viability under serum-deprived conditions
[87]. survival was not abrogated by inhibition of either the pi3k
or erk1/2 pathways, but appeared to be pkc-dependent as small
interfering rnas against pkcδ, pkcζ or p90rsk blocked rescue.
the role of pi3k signaling and phosphorylation of the camp
response-element binding protein (creb) in igf-i-mediated
survival of cultured cortical neurons also appears uncertain [90],
as the survival-promoting effect of bdnf was much weaker than
that of igf-1 in serum deprivation yet both hormones induced
similar levels of pi3k activation and akt phosphorylation.
further phosphorylation of erk1/2 and creb was stimulated by
bdnf much more potently than by igf-1, thus effectively
dissociating these signaling events from survival.
deprivation of serum results in activation of the c-jun n-
terminal kinase (jnk) pathway in several model systems
[84,85,88]. jnk1 and jnk2 were activated within 1 h of
serum-withdrawal in schwann cells [84], and apoptosis was
blocked by expression of a dominant negative jnk mutant. igf-
i-mediated decrease of jnk activation was pi3k-dependent.
interestingly, overexpression of bcl-xl also attenuated apoptosis,
and also decreased activation of jnks. these results suggest a
common mechanism by which bcl-xl and igfs suppress jnk
activation-induced stress, although the signaling pathway in-
volved is obscure. quite different results have been reported
where igf-i rescue of il-3 dependent fl5.12 lymphocytic cells
(overexpressing igf-ir) appears to be independent of pi3k/akt
signaling. further, rather than suppressing jnk activation, igf-i
induced a rapid and transient activation of jnk that was paralleled
by a transient and robust phosphorylation of c-jun. activation of
the jnk pathway by igf-i occurred in the presence of pi3k
inhibitors. analysis of a series of fl5.12 cells expressing mutated
igf-irs and analysis of 32d/igf-ir cells (deficient in irs
proteins) showed that neither the c-terminus of igf-ir nor irs-1
and irs-2 were required for jnk activation, although y950 of
igf-ir was essential for full activation. dicumarol, an inhibitor
of jnk activity suppressed igf-i-mediated activation of jnk and
phosphorylation of c-jun but did not affect p38 and iκb
phosphorylation or activation of akt. igf-i-mediated protection
from apoptosis was completely suppressed by dicumarol [88]. in
pc12 pheochromocytoma cells, complete removal of serum leads
to rapid stimulation of the jnk pathway. igf-i inhibits jnk
activation, whereas wortmannin even in the presence of serum
stimulates jnk activity. this suggests igf-mediated signaling
through the pi3k/akt pathway chronically inhibits the jnk
pathway in pc12 cells. stimulation of jnk activity by serum
withdrawal in pc12 cell clones stably expressing myr-akt was
inhibited, as was phosphorylation of both jnks and a proximal
activator, mkk4, in response to uv irradiation. interestingly,
transient expression of myr-akt strongly inhibited cjun tran-
sactivation mediated by mekk1 or mkk7-jnk3, (a gain-of-
function fusion protein) that was associated with marked
induction of jnk-interacting protein-1 (jip-1). from these results
it was proposed that akt-mediated negative regulation of the
jnk pathway is through induction of specific jip proteins and
contributes to the antiapoptotic actions of akt signaling in
neuronal cell types [85].
6.2. cytokines
the mechanism(s) by which igfs protect cells from tnf-α-
induced apoptosis appear to be model-specific, and in many
instances pathways have not been rigorously defined. the pro-
inflammatory cytokines tnf-α and il-1β appear to act
in
synergy to locally suppress longitudinal growth of bone tissue, an
effect that can be partially reversed by igf-i [92], although the
signaling pathway(s) involved have not been reported. igf-ii
partially reverses tnf-α induced apoptosis by suppressing the
induction of fas receptor [93], and protects 3t3 fibroblasts from
tnf-α, without preventing tnf-α-induced increase in arachi-
donic acid. of note, protection was abrogated in presence of
protein synthesis inhibitors [94]. a role for igfbp-3 as a mediator
of apoptosis induced by tnf-α has also been proposed [95]. igf-
i also protected isolated pancreas islet cells against cytokine
(tnf-α, il-1β, inf-γ)-mediated cell death. this protective
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
effect of igf-i was blocked by wortmannin demonstrating that
the pi3k/akt pathway mediates survival [96]. igf-1 also
blocked ‘extrinsic death’ induced by fasl, but not by ifn-γ
combined with fasl in bovine granulosa cells [97].
in ht29-d4 colon carcinoma cells igf-i fully protected from
ifn-γ/tnfα induced apoptosis [98]. survival signaling initiated
by igf-i was not dependent on pi3k, ribosomal p70 s6 kinase
(s6k1) or pkc-mediated signaling. pharmacological inhibition of
erk1/2 and p38 partially reversed igf-i protection. preventing
degradation of iκbα, the inhibitor of nfκb, with bay 11-7082
also blocked in part the igf-i antiapoptotic effect. complete
reversal of the igf-i protection was obtained only when nfκb and
either erk1/2 or p38 were inhibited together. because these
pathways are also those used by tnf-α to signal inflammation and
survival, these data point to cross talk between igf-i- and tnf-
induced signaling. tnfα-induced il-8 production in these colon
carcinoma cells was strongly enhanced by igf-i, and this effect
was completely abrogated by both mapk and nfκb inhibitors.
these findings suggest that the antiapoptotic function of igf-i in
ht29-d4 cells is based on the enhancement of the survival
pathways initiated by tnfα and mediated by p38, erk1/2, and
nfκb, which act in concert to suppress the proapoptotic signals.
cross-talk between the pi3k and sphingomyelinase pathways
as a mechanism for regulation of cell survival/death decisions has
also been reported [99]. igf-i and a constitutively active pi3k
suppress both tumor tnf-α-induced apoptosis and ceramide
generation. conversely, inhibition of the pi3k pathway enhanced
tnf-α-induced ceramide generation and prevented survival. the
expression of a constitutively active pi3k partially suppressed the
ability of exogenous sphingomyelinase to induce ceramide
generation, which was enhanced by inhibition of pi3k suggesting
that cross-talk between pi3k and ceramide generation within cells
is regulated downstream of activation of sphingomyelinase.
the role of stat signaling in mediating igf responses to
serum starvation or tnf-α has also been reported. under serum-
starved conditions igf-1 down-regulated surface expression of
the ifn-γ r2 chain as a consequence of increased internalization,
and inhibited both ifn-γ-dependent stat-1 activation and
apoptosis in t-cell lines [100]. in contrast, tnf-α downregulated
ir kinase activity and caused a profound inhibition of downstream
mitogenic signals including the mapk cascade and stat5, key
pathways of proliferation and cell survival in kym-1 rhabdomyo-
sarcoma cells [65]. tnf-α also inhibited igf-i-stimulated dna
synthesis in mcf-7 breast cancer cells. tnf-α appears to act by
inhibiting the igf-i receptor from phosphorylating irs-1 without
affecting the tyrosine kinase activity of the igf-ir itself [101]. it
has been proposed that the mechanism by which tnf-α-induces
neural degeneration may also be mediated by suppression of igf-
signaling and activation of pi3k [102]. one potential mechanism
would be tnf-α induction of a protein phosphatase (ptpl1 or
ptp1b) that regulates substrate phosphorylation.
alternatively, it has been proposed that igfs suppress apo-
ptosis by modulating the ability of tnf-α to activate jnk.
microglia-derived tnf-α induced jnk activation of co-cultured
gc4 cells, and both the toxicity of tnf-α and jnk activation
were blocked by microglia-derived igf-ii [103]. these data
implicate activation of jnk in tnf-α-mediated apoptosis, and
are consistent with igf-i suppressing ngf-induced c-jun phos-
phorylation in the developing chicken inner ear [104]. while
activation of the jnk pathway normally promotes cell death, in
sh-sy5y neuroblastoma cells it was found to promote survival
of tnf-α treated cells. inhibiting the c-jun pathway completely
reversed the ability of igf-i to rescue tnf-α toxicity [105].
igf-i can also potentiate tnf-α-induced apoptosis. in 3t3-l1
preadipocytes igf-i protected from apoptosis induced by serum-
withdrawal, but it increased apoptosis induced by tnf-α under
serum-free conditions. both the pi3k and erk pathways contri-
buted to the anti-apoptotic action of igf-i on serum-starved cells,
while pi3k but not erk1/2 activity is required for the paradoxical
pro-apoptotic action of igf-i in the presence of tnf-α [63].
similarly, low concentrations of tnf-α did not induce apoptosis of
c2 myoblasts, but co-incubation of igf-i or igf-ii with tnf-α
induced apoptosis. these results indicate that the effects of the igfs
on muscle-derived cells may depend on the cytokine environment.
in the absence of tnf-α, the igfs delay differentiation and
promote myoblast proliferation whereas in the presence of tnf-α
igfs induce apoptosis [64]. similarly, igf-i did not rescue rat
cortical oligodendrocyte cells from tnf-α toxicity [62].
6.3. loss of substrate attachment
when normal cells are released from their attachment to ex-
tracellular matrix, and plated under conditions that deny adhesion
to a substratum they undergo a form of apoptosis termed anoikis
[106]. under serum-free conditions 3t3 cells overexpressing the
igf-ir (r-cells) undergo apoptosis when seeded on polyhydrox-
yethylmethacrylate plates (that prevent substrate adherence) in
serum-free medium. igf-i protects from anoikis, without
inducing mitogenesis or dna synthesis, but induces a delayed
tyrosyl phosphorylation of the focal adhesion kinase (fak). the
importance of fak in protection from anoikis was strengthened
by the observation that v-src-transformed r-cells, in which fak
is constitutively phosphorylated, survive even in serum-free con-
ditions [107]. igf-i protection of mouse embryo fibroblasts
(mef) from anoikis is dependent on igf concentration and an
adequate number of functional igf-i receptors. in mefs igf-i
protection correlates best with ras activation and cell-to-cell
aggregation, while pi3-kinase, akt and erk1/2 seem to play a
lesser role [27].
in mammary epithelial cells onset of apoptosis corresponded
to the time at which igf-i expression decreased (∼16 h after loss
of matrix adhesion), hence it was postulated that igf-1 expression
may be linked to cell substrate adhesion [108]. it was found that
igf-1 was able to maintain akt activity and phosphorylation of
proapoptotic proteins in cells that have lost matrix contact.
however akt was not able to phosphorylate and inactivate
glycogen synthase kinase 3β (gsk-3β), under these conditions.
the postulated mechanism is the rapid translocation of active
akt away from gsk-3β when cells lose matrix contact.
activation of gsk3β leads to rapid loss of cyclin d leading to
a loss of cdk 4 activity and accumulation of hypophospho-
rylated, active rb. this facilitates assembly of a repressor
complex containing histone deacetylase, rb, and e2f that blocks
transcription of the gene for igf-1, subsequent inactivation of
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
akt, and accumulation of active proapoptotic proteins, and
death. it is proposed that this feedback loop determines how long
akt will remain active after cells lose matrix contact, and thus
serves to regulate the onset of apoptosis.
integrin-signaling and the ability of igfs to stimulate cell
migration, division, and inhibit apoptosis have been examined
extensively in vascular smooth muscle cells. it has been proposed
that within the vessel wall ligand occupancy of the αvβ3 integrin
[109] is required for assembly of a multicomponent membrane
signaling complex that is necessary for cells to respond optimally
to igf-i [110,111]. one integrin, αvβ3, expressed in smooth
muscle cells modulates igf-i actions, and ligand occupancy of
αvβ3 is required for igf-i to stimulate cell migration and
division, fig. 3. ligand occupancy of αvβ3 stimulates tyrosine
phosphorylation of the β3-subunit, resulting in recruitment of the
tyrosine phosphatase shp-2 and its transfer to downstream
signaling molecules mediated by an irs-i-related protein termed
dok-1. shp-2 is transferred to another transmembrane protein,
shps-1 that is dependent on igf-ir-mediated tyrosine phos-
phorylation of shps-1 and engagement of integrin associated
protein (iap). the transfer of shp-2 to shps-1 is also required
for recruitment of the adaptor protein shc to shps-1. ligand
occupancy of αvβ3 induces sustained shc phosphorylation and
enhanced shc recruitment. shc activation results in sustained
induction of erk1/2 required for optimal mitogenic response to
igf stimulation and protection from apoptosis. if αvβ3 ligand
occupancy is inhibited, there is no recruitment of the tyrosine
phosphatase shp-2 to αvβ3 and its transfer to downstream
signaling molecules is blocked. inhibition of the shc/shps-1
complex formation results in failure to achieve sustained erk1/2
activation and an attenuated mitogenic response. the importance
of this pathway is that adhesion mediated by shc-linked integrin
signaling promotes cell survival and progression through the g1
phase of the cell cycle in response to mitogenic growth factors.
the nuclear receptor coactivator aib1 (amplified in breast
cancer 1) has also been implicated in igf-i mediated anchorage-
independent survival [112]. aib1 is overexpressed in human
breast cancers, is required for estrogen signaling, and has been
reported to be rate-limiting for igf-i-dependent phenotypic
changes and gene expression in breast cancer cells. reduction of
endogenous aib1 levels by small interfering rna in mcf-7
breast cancer cells prevented igf-i-stimulated anchorage-inde-
pendent growth, promoted anoikis, and led to a significant
decrease in the expression of several genes controlling the cell
cycle and apoptosis. these effects in breast cancer cell lines were
independent of their estrogen receptor status. of interest, aib1
reduction decreased the expression of the igf-ir and irs-1 in
mcf-7 cells and inhibited igf-i-stimulated activation of akt
but not phosphorylation of erk1/2. it was concluded that aib1
expression is required for igf-i-induced proliferation, signaling,
cell survival, and increased expression of both igf-ir and irs-i
genes in human breast cancer cells, suggesting positive feedback.
6.4. oxidative stress
igfs protect against apoptosis induced by agents that cause
oxidative stress. these include nitric oxide (no) inducers/donors,
h2o2 [58], and free fatty acids [57,113]. igf-1 inhibition of
neuronal apoptosis in primary hippocampal neurons was
associated with decreased caspase-3-like activation induced by
no donors, sodium nitroprusside or 3-morpholin-osydnonimine.
incubation with p13k inhibitors blocked the protective effects of
igf-i and also blocked the effect of igf-1 preventing down-
regulation in bcl-2 and upregulation in bax expression induced
by no. adenovirus-mediated overexpression of the activated
form of akt significantly inhibited no-induced cell death,
caspase-3-like activation, and changes in bcl-2 and bax ex-
pression, whereas expression of the kinase-defective form of
akt almost completely blocked the effects of igf-1. these
findings are similar those of yamaguchi et al. [56] and indicate
that activation of akt is necessary for igf-i preventing no-
induced apoptosis. however, some caution in interpreting results
fig. 3. cooperation between integrin and igf-ir receptor signaling. binding of ligand to αvβ3 integrin stimulates association of a complex comprised of dok-1 and
the tyrosine phosphatase shp-2 to the β3 subunit (1). igf-ir-mediated phosphorylation of the transmembrane docking protein shps-1 requires its association with
integrin associated protein (iap) and creates a high affinity site for shp-2 binding (2), and shp-2 is recruited to shps-1 (3). recruitment of shp-2 to shps-1 is
required for recruitment of shc (4) and sustained activation of erk1/2 mapk in response to igf-1 (adapted from [110]).
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
using adenoviral vectors should be invoked as even replication
deficient ‘empty’ adenovirus can activate the akt signaling
pathway overriding translation [114] and other checkpoints.
growth factors are known to stimulate ros (reactive oxygen
species such as superoxide radical, h2o2, and hydroxyl radical).
most data show that ros stimulate cell death [115–117], for
example exogenous h2o2 causes apoptosis at low concentrations
and necrosis at high concentrations [118]. recent data suggest,
however, that ros can inhibit apoptosis in smooth muscle
[117,119], leukemia cells [120], colorectal [121] and prostate
cancer cells [122]. in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma mia
paca-2 and panc-1 cells igf-1, fgf or serum induced ros
produced by membrane nonmitochondrial nad(p)h oxidase
(probably nox4, nonphagocytic oxidase) protects the cells from
apoptosis. antisense to nox4, antioxidants or mnsod over-
expression all induced apoptosis. on the other hand, both stim-
ulation [115,116,123] and inhibition of apoptosis [117,120,
122,124] was reported with antioxidants. in principle, ros can
affect cell death both positively and negatively, and may cause
apoptosis or necrosis by damaging the mitochondria and plasma
membrane. however, ros are also known to activate anti-apop-
totic pathways such as nf-κb and the heat-shock proteins such as
hsp70 and hsp27 [125,126]. superoxide has also been reported to
inhibit fas-induced apoptosis in a leukemia cell line [120].
igf-i reduced arachidonic acid-induced apoptosis, and
adenoviral mediated expression of a constitutively active akt,
but not a “kinase-dead” variant, essentially prevented arachidonic
acid-induced apoptosis. analysis of pro-apoptotic downstream
targets of akt, implicated a role for akt-mediated phosphor-
ylation and inhibition of gsk3α/β and the forkhead transcription
factor, fkhrl1, in protection of oleic acid-induced apoptosis. it
was postulated that down-regulation of the pro-apoptotic tumor
suppressor protein, p53, via akt-mediated phosphorylation of
mdm2 might also play a role in partially protecting β-cells from
oleic acid-induced apoptosis as adenoviral mediated expression of
wild type p53 potentiated oleic acid-induced beta-cell apoptosis,
whereas expression of a dominant negative p53 partly inhibited
β-cell apoptosis [113].
6.5. hypoxia/ischemia
the role of igfs in protecting against ischemia in vivo or
hypoxia in vitro has been extensively studied [36,37,41,42,
44,70,127,128]. wang et al. [119] tested the hypothesis that the
transcriptional activation of igf-i is one of the underlying mech-
anisms for hypoxia-induced neuroprotection. in a rodent model of
hypoxia–ischemia, hypoxia preconditioning improved neuronal
survival as demonstrated by decreased hypoxia–ischemia-
induced neuronal apoptosis. hypoxia preconditioning resulted
in an increase in neuronal igf-i mrna levels in cerebral cortex
and hippocampus with or without hypoxia–ischemia. using
primary neuronal cultures they demonstrated that as oxygen
concentration decreased, neuronal survival also decreased, and
survival could be increased by igf-i. igf-i treatment resulted in
an activation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (hif-1α). increased
hif-1α mrna was associated with increased dna binding
activity alone or with subsequent hypoxia ischemia. overall,
these results suggest that igf-i transcriptional activation is one of
the metabolic adaptive responses to hypoxia, which is likely
mediated by a direct activation of hif-1α.
protection from neuronal cell death by these growth factors
under hypoxic conditions derives at least partly from their
ability to prevent down-regulation of certain anti-apoptotic
proteins [127]. hypoxia-induced apoptosis in cortical neurons
correlated with a rapid and sustained down-regulation of bcl-2,
whereas levels of bax were unchanged. treatment with either
igf-1 or bfgf, partly prevented neuronal death accompanied
by inhibition of alterations in bcl-2 protein levels and caspase-
3-like activities. thus, one component of hypoxia-driven
neuronal cell death is by down-regulation of bcl-2 protein
levels followed by sequential activation of the caspases. tagami
et al. [129] demonstrated the ability of igf-i and antioxidants to
protect against prolonged hypoxia followed by reperfusion in a
rat model. it was postulated that igf-i attenuated p53-mediated
apoptosis and thereby prevented cell death. in hippocampal
neurons activation of
igf-1r activated pi3k/akt, and
intracerebral injection of igf-i or sodium orthovanadate, a
protein tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor, prior to ischemic insult
delayed neuronal death.
further data implicate p53 in apoptosis induced by hypoxia or
no treatments of primary cultured hippocampal neurons [56].
although hypoxia and no induced p53, treatment with igf-i
significantly inhibited transcriptional activity of p53, caspase-3-
like activation, and neuronal death. igf-i effects were prevented
by wortmannin, hence mediated through pi3k. adenovirus-
mediated expression of activated-akt kinase also suppressed
p53-dependent
transcriptional activation of bax, suppressed
caspase-3-like activity and suppressed neuronal cell death.
however, surprisingly, constitutively active akt had no effect
on the cellular accumulation and nuclear translocation of p53.
overexpression of kinase-defective akt failed to suppress these
same activities. it was proposed that it is through akt activation
and suppression of p53′s transcriptional activity that neurons are
rescued from hypoxia- or no-mediated cell death. however, the
role of p53 in determining igf-i-mediated protection is not
established as igfs protect in many cell lines where p53 is
mutated. with the availability of genetically engineered mice with
deletions in akt genes, or p53, it should be possible to un-
equivocally define the role of these pathways in igf-1-mediated
survival in vivo, or in primary cell cultures.
igf-i also prevented hypoxia-induced apoptosis of cultured
neonatal cardiomyocytes. antiapoptotic signals induced by igf-i
appeared to be mediated by more than one signaling pathway,
because pharmacological inhibition of the pi3k or mek1 sig-
naling pathways each antagonized the protective effect of igf-i in
an additive manner. igf-i-stimulation was followed by a pi3k-
dependent phosphorylation of akt and bad and mek1-de-
pendent phosphorylation of erk1/2. igf-i also induced
phosphorylation of creb in a pi3k- and mek1-dependent
manner. ectopic overexpression of a dominant-negative mutant of
creb abolished the antiapoptotic effect of igf-i, and over-
expression of dominant-negative creb or inhibition of pi3k
abrogated igf-i stimulated accumulation of bcl-2 [130]. thus, in
cardiomyocytes the antiapoptotic actions of igf-i requires
10
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
signaling both through pi3k but also erk1/2 leading to the
activation of the creb-mediated transcription.
a proapoptotic member of the bcl-2 family, bnip3 (bcl-2/
e1b 19 kda interacting protein) is expressed in hypoxic regions
of tumors considered to be resistant to radiation and some
chemotherapeutic agents. during hypoxia, bnip3 expression is
increased and upon forced overexpression bnip3 induced cell
death. the apoptotic activities of bnip3 appeared to be modu-
lated by both igfs and egf [131]. treatment of mcf-7 breast
cancer cells with egf or igf-i effectively protected these cells
from bnip3-induced cell death. an alternative mechanism by
which hypoxia induces death is through upregulation of igfbp3
[132]. potentially, igfs could neutralize the proapoptotic actions
of igfbp3.
resulting in apoptosis. however, it remains unclear if such mea-
surements of apoptosis correlate with cell survival, as determined
by clonogenic assay [134,135]. for example, in mcf-7 breast
cancer cells apoptosis was induced after uv treatment but
caspase-9 cleavage was unchanged with uv and/or igf-i treat-
ment although this study did not address how igf-i protected
against uv-induced damage [136]. similarly, there is discordance
when the relationship between apoptotic activity and clonogenic
radiosensitivity, following ionizing radiation, has been studied.
igf-ir deficient mouse embryo fibroblast cell lines engineered to
overexpress human igf-ir demonstrated significant dna
fragmentation and increase in caspase-3-, -8-, and -9-like activ-
ities. rather surprisingly,
these cells were radioresistant as
measured by a colony-forming assay [71].
6.6. uv radiation
6.7. ceramide
kulik et al. [133] first reported that igf-i (but not egf or
overexpression of activated pp60v-src) protected fibroblasts from
apoptosis induced by uv-b light. antiapoptotic signaling was
through the igf-ir, as kinase-defective mutants could not rescue
from uv-b. protection by igf-i was not associated with activ-
ation of erk1/2, p38, or s6k1 whereas protection was abrogated
by pi3k inhibition. overexpression of activated pi3k was
sufficient
to provide protection against apoptosis, as was
constitutively active membrane-targeted akt.
using primary human keratinocytes kuhn et al. [51] found that
insulin, signaling through the igf-ir, had a unique function in
protecting against uv-b-induced apoptosis. activation of the
igf-1r in combination with uv-b irradiation induced keratino-
cytes to become post-mitotic. this survival function of the igf-1
receptor in response to uv-b irradiation was influenced by
activation of pi3k and erk1/2 pathways. it was proposed that
activation of the igf-1r in conjunction with uv-b irradiation
promotes keratinocyte survival at the expense of cell proliferation.
the role of igf-i-induced activation of akt in protecting growth
factor-deprived keratinocytes from uv-b induced apoptosis was
also reported by decreane et al. [50]. however, in this study it was
reported that igf-1 significantly and consistently delayed the
onset of uv-b-induced apoptosis allowing igf-1-supplemented
keratinocytes to repair significantly more cyclobutane thymine
dimers than their growth factor-deprived counterparts. this
increase in cyclobutane thymine removal resulted in enhanced
survival if the amount of dna damage was not too high. to
increase cell survival after uv-b irradiation, igf-1 supplemen-
tation was required only during this initial time period in which
extra repair was executed. the conclusion from these studies was
that akt signaling increases cell survival after a genotoxic insult
such as uv-b irradiation by postponing the induction of apo-
ptosis, giving the dna repair mechanism more time to work, and
not by inhibiting the apoptotic stimulus.
the importance of the ‘intrinsic’ mitochondrial pathway in uv-
induced apoptosis has been stressed in several studies. following
uv-induced dna damage cytochrome c and other pro-apoptotic
factors are released from the mitochondria, allowing for formation
of the apoptosome and subsequent cleavage and activation of
caspase-9 and activation of downstream caspases-3 and/or -7
the sphingomyelin pathway signals apoptosis for ngf upon
binding to p75 receptors, initiated by sphingomyelin hydrolysis
to generate the second messenger ceramide. in organotypic
cultures of otic vesicles ngf stimulates sphingomyelin hy-
drolysis and the concomitant ceramide release and induces
apoptosis that was suppressed by igf-i, which is a strong
promoter of cell growth and morphogenesis for the developing
inner ear [137]. igf-1 may also activate a novel survival mech-
anism that selectively protects developing neurons against
ceramide-induced apoptosis by up-regulation of erk1/2 and
reduction of expression of the prostate apoptosis response-4
gene (par-4) [138].
stewart et al. [139] showed that lower concentrations of the
sphingolipid analogue c2-ceramide were required to induce
apoptosis in igf-ir-deficient compared to receptor positive
murine fibroblasts, suggesting that igf-ir signaling functions as
a survival receptor, but indicating also that ceramide is not
inducing apoptosis by suppressing a survival effect of the igf-ir.
hydrolysis of ceramide to sphingosine-1-phosphate was not the
cause of increased erk1/2 activation, although mapk activation
appeared to be important in the death signaling pathway as
inhibitors of mek-1/2 reduced ceramide-induced apoptosis.
using igf-ir-positive fibroblasts it was found that ceramide
activated a tyrosine kinase that acts at the level of the igf-ir to
increase cell death. sodium orthovanadate increased ceramide-
induced death, and enhanced phosphorylation of a 75-kda pro-
tein, found to associate with the igf-ir. as inhibitors of mek-1/
2 decrease ceramide-induced apoptosis, it was speculated that the
igf-ir-associated p75 may link into the raf kinase signaling
pathway which may be involved in apoptosis [140].
6.8. fas/trail signaling
protection by igf-i from fasl or tnf-related apoptosis-
inducing ligand (trail)/apo2 ligand-induced apoptosis appears
to be mediated through the pi3k/akt pathway. akt exerts its
antiapoptotic function through its ability to phosphorylate many
key components of the cellular apoptotic regulatory circuit, such
as bad, mdm2, forkhead transcription factors, and ped/pea-15
as well as by its role in activating nfκb (reviewed in [141]).
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
11
in ovarian follicle granulosa cells igf-i activated both the
pi3k and the erk1/2 pathways and protected against fas ligand-
induced apoptosis. using specific inhibitors of these pathways it
was shown that protection by igf-i was mediated by the pi3k-
akt pathway and not the erk1/2 pathway [142]. treatment
with igf-i, or expression of myr-akt, increased progression
from g0/g1 to s phase of the cell cycle. roscovitine a cdk-2
inhibitor that blocks cells at the g1/s transition prevented the
protective effect of igf-i and myr-akt expression against
apoptosis. it was thus concluded that activation of akt was not
sufficient to protect granulosa cells from apoptosis in the absence
of cell cycle progression and that cell cycle progression was
required for protection. however, it is important to consider that
roscovitine, as with other cdk inhibitors such as flavopiridol, may
have activities in addition to inhibition of cdk-2 (e.g. inhibition of
transcript elongation), and an alternative interpretation is that
igf-i does not rescue from roscovitine-induced death. in bovine
granulosa cells ifn-γ specifically antagonized igf-i-mediated
rescue from fasl induced killing, possibly due to increased
expression of the fas receptor [97].
c-myc-induced apoptosis has also been shown to require the
fas death receptor pathway and that igf-1 signaling suppresses
this killing [143]. c-myc activation did not exacerbate killing
induced by fadd or pro-caspase-8, suggesting that c-myc exerts
its action downstream of the interaction of fas. it is of note,
however that igf-i potentiated c-myc-induced cell death in huh-
7 hepatoma cells that was related to enhanced oxidative stress
under serum-free conditions [53]. the mechanisms regulating
trail-induced death have been investigated in thyroid carcinoma
cells [144]. igf-1 activated akt, up-regulated the caspase
inhibitors cflip, ciap-2, xiap, and surviving, and attenuated
trail-induced apoptosis. this effect was inhibited by an igf-1
receptor neutralizing antibody, wortmannin, and the heat shock
protein-90 chaperone inhibitor geldanamycin. transfection of
constitutively active akt protected from trail. conversely,
ifn-γ and tnf-α had a sensitizing effect preventing igf-i-
mediated survival. it was proposed that microenvironmental
paracrine survival factors, such as igf-1, modulate expression of
caspase inhibitors, including the decoy receptor cflip, and protect
from trail in a pi3k/akt-dependent manner.
6.9. anticancer drugs
as with other sections in this review, the role of igfs in
protecting from apoptosis, or toxicities associated with the use of
anticancer chemotherapeutic agents will be considered in intact
organisms as the most definitive evidence of a true physiological
role, and subsequently in ‘more artificial’ model systems. the
varied role of igfs in protecting cancer cells may reflect the
genomic plasticity of malignant cells hence data from the same
putative cell line cultured in separate laboratories may differ due
to genetic drift. in intact rodents igf-i has been demonstrated to
enhance mucosal repair, and offer partial protection, following
intestinal damage induced by chemotherapeutic agents such as 5-
fluorouracil (5-fu) and methotrexate, or abdominal radiation
[145–148]. although prophylactic igf-i only partially attenuates
features of intestinal mucositis when assessed 48 h after 5-fu
chemotherapy [47]. inhibiting igf-ir through use of a fully
human igg2 antibody was effective in inhibiting the growth of
human tumor xenografts, and markedly potentiated the activity of
doxorubicin but was additive with either 5-fu or tamoxifen
[149]. further examples are discussed later.
igf-1 has also been shown to suppress myocardial apoptosis
and improves myocardial function in experimental models of
anthracycline-induced cardiomyopathy. igf-1 signaling modu-
lated mitochondria membrane depolarization in cardiomyocytes
treated with the cardiotoxin, doxorubicin, which rapidly induced
loss of mitochondria electrochemical gradient and triggered
mitochondria depolarization. addition of igf-1 restored the
mitochondria electrochemical gradient [150]. the effects of igf-
1 were blocked by pi3k inhibitors and a dominant negative akt,
whereas constitutive active pi3k partially restored the mitochon-
dria electrochemical gradient in doxorubicin-treated cells. these
findings provide direct evidence that igf-i modulation of
mitochondria function is mediated through activation of pi 3
kinase and akt, but were considered to be independent of the k
(atp) channel.
dexamethasone, an agent used extensively in treatment of
leukemias and multiple myeloma, induces overexpression of the
pi3k subunit p85α, which, in turn, competes with pi3k for
binding to irs-1, inhibiting pi3k activation and blocking igf-
i-induced phosphorylation of akt. increased cellular p85α
abundance, significantly inhibited igf-i rescue from apo-
ptosis induced by mannitol, whereas constitutively active pi3k
inhibited death induced by mannitol, even in the presence of
dexamethasone [61].
in contrast, igf-i has been reported to inhibit dexamethasone-
induced apoptosis through a mechanism involving regulation of
telomerase activity. igf-1, and il-6 have been reported to up-
regulate telomerase activity without alteration of human telomer-
ase reverse transcriptase (htert) protein expression in human
multiple myeloma cells. increased telomerase activity triggered by
these cytokines was mediated by pi3k/akt/nfκb signaling
because the pi3k inhibitors wortmannin and ly294002 or an iκb
kinase inhibitor (ps-1145) blocked constitutive and cytokine-
induced up-regulation of telomerase activity. in multiple myeloma
cells dexamethasone induced some apoptosis (with ∼64% of cells
viable at 24 h) that was preceded by reduced telomerase activity.
igf-1 and il-6 increased viability (∼87% viable at 24 h) in
dexamethasone-treated cultures, although the protective effects
were not seen at earlier time points, and later time points were not
examined. the protective effect of these cytokines against
dexamethasone-induced down-regulation of telomerase activity
was blocked by both wortmannin and ps-1145. in contrast,
protection against dexamethasone-induced apoptosis was blocked
by wortmannin but not ps-1145. these results were interpreted to
demonstrate that telomerase activity is related not only to trans-
criptional regulation of htert by nfκb but also to posttran-
scriptional regulation because of phosphorylation of htert by
aktafter igf-i stimulation [151]. further studies will be required
to confirm whether this is a general mechanism for protection from
dexamethasone, or limited to this cell line.
in multiple myeloma cell lines rapamycin, a specific inhibitor
of the mtor s/t kinase, induced g0/g1 arrest, an effect being
12
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
associated with an increase of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhi-
bitor p27kip1 and a decrease of cyclins d2 and d3 [152]. inte-
restingly, in primary, mainly noncycling multiple myeloma cells,
rapamycin induced apoptosis. more important, rapamycin
sensitized both multiple myeloma cell lines and primary cells to
dexamethasone-induced apoptosis. this effect was associated
with a decreased expression of cyclin d2 and survivin. strikingly,
the combination treatment with rapamycin and dexamethasone
suppressed the antiapoptotic effects of exogenously added igf-i
as well as its stimulation of s6k1 phosphorylation. one mecha-
nism to explain this is that s6k1 has been reported to phos-
phorylate and inactivate bad [153], thus rapamycin would block
s6k1 activation through mtor. however, inhibition of mtor
by rapamycin leads to increased phosphorylation of akt in many
cancer cells, and in tumor biopsies from patients treated with
rapamycin analogues. inactivation of s6k1 relieves the negative
feedback on irs-1, its stabilization, and upregulation of igf-1r
mediated signaling that activates akt [154].
regulating kinase-1 (ask1)
hosoi et al. [155] reported that rapamycin induced g1 cell
cycle accumulation and apoptosis in two rhabdomyosarcoma
cell lines under conditions of autocrine cell growth. exogenous
insulin-like growth factor (igf)-i protected from apoptosis,
without reactivating ribosomal s6k1 downstream of mtor.
the mechanism by which rapamycin induced apoptosis was
shown to be a consequence of tor inhibition leading to
decreased activity of protein phosphatase-5, and activation of
apoptosis signal
leading to
increased jnk activity and increased phospho-c-jun. interest-
ingly, c-jun phosphorylation remained elevated only in p53
mutant cells, whereas it returned to control levels in cells with
wild type p53, or when p21cip1 was expressed [156,157].
rescue from rapamycin-induced apoptosis was found to be
independent of both akt and ras/erk1/2, but dependent on
pi3k [158]. more recent data indicate that igf-i activates pkc
isoforms downstream of pi3k, leading to phosphorylation of
the proapoptotic protein bad (s112) and its subsequent
sequestration by 14-3-3γ. in this study, phosphorylation of
bad was consistent with other reports [159–161], however
phosphorylation of bad was independent of erk1/2-activated
kinases, (rsks). igf-i protection against apoptosis induced by
the protein phosphatase inhibitor okadaic acid in rat cerebellar
neurons also appeared to be dependent on pkc signaling [162].
in contrast igf-i protected vascular smooth muscle cells from
apoptosis induced by the pkc inhibitor calphostin c [163].
inhibitors of pi3k and erk activation, but not p38, reversed
igf-i protection.
apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ask1) is a pivotal
component of a signaling pathway induced by many death
stimuli, including tnf-α, fas, and the anticancer drugs cisplatin
and paclitaxel [164]. activation of ask1 and jnk via mkk4/7
or p38 via mkk3/6 is implicated in apoptosis induced by several
anticancer chemotherapeutic agents. at high concentrations
paclitaxel, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and etoposide induce jnk
activity, a kinase that conveys cellular stress and death signals
although the exact significance in cell survival is not well
established [165,166]. importantly, whereas etoposide, doxoru-
bicin and vinblastine treatment activated jnk and induced
apoptosis, only treatment with vinblastine increased levels of p-
c-jun [166]. thus, the relevance of jnk activation in drug-
induced apoptosis is unclear. there are also exceptions where
enhanced jnk activity has been correlated with increased
survival. mamay et al. [167] showed that igf-i alone induced a
potent jnk response in breast cancer cell lines and this activity
was reversed by inhibition of pi3k in mcf-7 but not t47d cells.
co-treatment of cells with chemotherapy and igf-i led to
additive jnk responses, and igf-i-mediated survival was akt
dependent. in contrast, overexpression of jnk significantly
enhances paclitaxel-induced apoptosis and inhibited igf-i-
mediated survival. the inhibitory effect of jnk on survival
was attributed to phosphorylation of irs-i at s312 since both
paclitaxel and igf-i treatment enhanced phosphorylation, while
ly294002 blocked igf-i-mediated phosphorylation. exactly
how inhibition of pi3k could influence irs-i phosphorylation at
s312 was not elucidated. one possibility is that inhibition of
pi3k leads to inactivation of s6k1 and stabilization of irs-i
[154,168]. further, s312 phosphorylation is considered to be an
activating posttranslational modification and would be antici-
pated to enhance igf-i mediated signaling. in contrast protection
by igf-i from etoposide-induced apoptosis was associated with
increasing the expression of bcl-2 and decreasing the activity of
a 32-kda putative cysteine protease [169], although it is not clear
that the kinetics for bcl-2 induction correlated with survival, and
no experiments to test this were presented. signaling through the
igf-ir-akt pathway also appears important in determining
clonogenic survival of small cell lung cancer cells that are very
sensitive to etoposide [170]. igf-i also protected from brefeldin
a, paclitaxel and etoposide in rat parotid salivary acinar cells
[171].
in addition, to its role in myogenesis it has been shown that
twist
is a potential oncogene antagonizing p53-dependent
apoptosis. this pathway appears highly conserved as in
transgenic drosophila lines allowing ectopic expression of
different twist orthologs, human twist antagonizes drosophila
p53-dependent apoptosis [172]. twist has also been implicated
in igf-i mediated resistance to etoposide [173]. downregula-
tion of twist using antisense decreased significantly the ability
of igf-1 to rescue nih-3t3 fibroblasts engineered to over-
express the human igf-1 receptor from etoposide-induced
apoptosis. of note, igf-i signaling through the igf-ir, (but not
insulin in ir overexpressing 3t3 cells), increased the level of
twist mrna as well as protein by 3-fold. the mek1/2
inhibitor u0126 or expression of a dominant negative mek-1
abolished the effect of igf-1 on twist mrna expression,
suggesting that twist induction by igf-1 occurs via the mapk
signaling pathway. importantly, in vivo administration of igf-i
increased levels of twist
in mouse skeletal muscle. these
results implicate twist as an important factor involved in the
anti-apoptotic actions of the igf-1 receptor.
a novel role for igf-ir signaling in homologous recombina-
tion-directed dna repair has been proposed that may impact on
cellular responses to dna damage and genomic stability [174].
using embryo fibroblasts engineered to express ∼30,000 igf-ir/
cell it was found that in the presence of serum, addition of igf-i
protected from cisplatin cytotoxicity. this effect correlated with
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
13
decreased dna damage (correlated with decreased phosphory-
lated γh2ax nuclear foci), and increased reconstitution of gfp-
fluorescence in an assay where the rare cutting endonuclease i-
scei was used to generate double strand dna breaks within a
transfected gfp plasmid. increased dna repair appears to
involve an interaction between rad51 and irs-1. association
occurs within the cytoplasm,
involving the n-terminal ptp
domain of irs-1 which is attenuated by igf-i-mediated irs-1
tyrosine phosphorylation. in the absence of igf-i stimulation,
localization of rad51 to the sites of damaged dna is diminished.
these results point to a direct role of irs-1 in homologous
recombination-directed dna repair and suggest a novel role for
the igf-ir/irs-1 axis in supporting the stability of the genome. it
is of interest to note that in serum-free conditions where embryo
fibroblasts were quiescent, addition of igf-i selectively increased
the cytotoxicity of cells overexpressing igf-ir. presumably, this
was the result of stimulating proliferation. hence the effect of
igf-i in protecting from or potentiating dna damage may
depend upon the number of functional receptors. thus, one
should consider pathways revealed only in cells expressing high
receptor levels with some caution.
increased expression of the igf-ir gene is correlated with
acquisition of radioresistance for cell killing. as the ataxia-
telangiectasia mutated (atm) gene product has a pivotal role in
coordinating the cellular response to dna damage, shahrabani et
al. [175] investigated a potential link between atm function and
the igf-axis. they showed that igf-ir gene expression and igf-
ir promoter activity were largely reduced in atm−/− cells. in
addition, igf-i-induced igf-ir and irs-i phosphorylation were
impaired in htert immortalized atm-deficient cells compared
to immortalized fibroblasts. the data support the idea that the
igf-ir gene is a novel downstream target in an atm-mediated
dna damage response pathway, possibly mediated by sp1 and
wt1 zinc-finger transcription factors. however, the radiomimetic
agent neocarzinostatin induced a significant increase in igf-ir
levels in cells without atm function, suggesting atm-
independent signaling. because of the genomic instability of
atm cells, it is not clear from these studies that atm deficiency
and igf-ir regulation are directly linked. perhaps similar studies
in early generation atm−/− mefs would be required to
unambiguously establish the role of atm in igf-ir regulation.
the protein-tyrosine phosphatase ptpl1 has also been
implicated in igf-i-mediated survival following anti-estrogen
treatment. in mcf-7 breast cancer cells ptpl1 expression
triggers 4-hydroxytamoxifen-induced growth inhibition. in the
presence of igf-i, 4-hydroxytamoxifen-induced apoptosis was
significantly abrogated in ptpl1 antisense transfectants in
which enzyme expression was downregulated. further, down-
regulation of ptpl1 was associated with enhanced rescue by
igf-i. the role of ptpl1 in apoptosis appears to be through a
significant reduction in pi3k/akt pathway activation accom-
panied by a decrease in irs-i phosphorylation. these results
provide evidence that the ptpl1 tyrosine phosphatase has a
role in the apoptotic process in human breast cancer cells treated
with 4-hydroxytamoxifen that may be associated with an early
inhibition of the irs-i/pi3k pathway and inhibition of igf-ir
signaling [176]. protein tyrosine phosphatase-1b (ptp-1b) is
also implicated in modulating igf-ir signaling as ptp-1b-
deficient cells exhibited enhanced igf-i-mediated protection
from apoptosis in response to serum withdrawal or etoposide
killing [177]. in spontaneously immortalized ptp-1b−/− mefs,
withdrawal of serum induced greater apoptosis than in ptp-
1b+/+ cells. while igf-i did not protect ptp-ib+/+ cells from
etoposide, the response to exogenous igf-i in terms of growth
promotion and protection from etoposide in ptp-1b−/− clones
was quite different. as the relative igf-i mediated activation of
akt in these clones was similar, the exact role of ptp-1b
consequently is somewhat unclear. re-expression of ptp-1b
resulted in decreased igf-ir and akt activation, enhanced
plating efficiency and igf-i-mediated motility, and decreased
protection from etoposide-induced apoptosis, although the latter
effect was quite small.
igf-i also protects from cyclooxygenase (cox)-2 inhibi-
tors, agents that demonstrate modest antineoplastic activity in
experimental models of human malignancies. in bxpc-3
pancreatic carcinoma cells coincubation with celecoxib
(25 μm) and igf-i
in 1% serum resulted in complete
attenuation of the celecoxib-induced apoptosis, whereas igf-i
had no effect at higher concentration of celecoxib (50 μm).
igf-i-induced increase in cell viability was associated with
inhibition of celecoxib-mediated g1 arrest and correlated with
increased akt activation. these results suggest that alterations
of igf-i levels or igf-i receptor signal transduction modulate
the antineoplastic actions of cox-2 inhibitors at least under
highly artificial conditions of low serum [178]. overexpression
of cox-2 in non-small cell lung cancer lines has been shown to
enhance the antiapoptotic and mitogenic effects of igf-i and
igf-ii, and facilitate the autophosphorylation of igf-ir. the
effects of cox-2 overexpression in promoting igf-i-mediated
survival correlated with increased pi3k activity, and decreased
expression of igfbp-3 [179].
6.10. membrane hyperpolarization
in weaver mice death of granule neurons appears to result from
a point mutation in the girk2 gene, which encodes a g protein-
activated, inwardly rectifying k+ channel protein. although the
genetic defect was identified, the molecular mechanism by which
the mutant k+ channel selectively attacks granule neurons in
weaver mice is unclear. zhong et al. [180] cross-bred weaver mice
with transgenic mice that overexpress igf-i in the cerebellum.
igf-i protected granule neurons in vivo. the presence of the igf-
i transgene doubled the number of cerebellar granule neurons in
these mice by preventing their premature apoptosis in vivo,
demonstrating a physiological role for igf-i in protecting against
apoptosis potentially caused by altered cellular polarization. in
vitro survival of explanted rat cerebellar granule neurons can be
maintained by depolarizing (high) concentrations of potassium
(25 mm), cyclic amp elevating agents and igf-i [181] that
results in phosphorylation of gsk3β and its inactivation.
inhibition of the survival signaling cascade initiated by these
agents resulted in apoptosis and activation of gsk3β. impor-
tantly, pharmacological inhibition of gsk3β rescued from cell
death, leading to the conclusion that regulation of gsk3β is a
14
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
critical event common to survival by different factors in cerebellar
granule neurons [182].
7. targeting igf-ir for cancer treatment
6.11. calcium influx
in neurons, calcium influx can serve as both a signal
promoting survival as well as in some instances promoting cell
death. survival is promoted by igf-i and l-channel-mediated
calcium influx [183,184]. l-channel activity is directly
controlled by depolarization, but also is enhanced by igf-i
through a pathway that requires pi3k, akt, and ultimately src-
dependent phosphorylation of the channel [185–187]. marshall
et al. [188] suggested that l channels and glutamate receptors
perform antagonistic functions.
igf-i, direct l channel
stimulation, and blocking nmda receptor activity all improve
survival and reduce nuclear c/ebpβ levels, while nmda
receptor stimulation or blocking l channel activity decrease
survival but increase nuclear c/ebpβ.
calcium levels also regulate the activity of the pro-survival
transcription factor, myocyte enhancer factor 2d (mef2d). in
studies of butts et al. [189], mef2d was hyperphosphorylated
and degraded in cerebellar granule neurons undergoing apoptosis
induced by lowering the extracellular potassium concentration.
igf-i significantly blocked the degradation of mef2d, and
enhanced recovery of mef2 activity following restoration of
intracellular calcium by protecting mef2d from caspase-de-
pendent cleavage during apoptosis. these results suggest that
igf-i can prolong the time of commitment to irreversible cell
death and enhance the recovery of neurons subjected to an acute
apoptotic stimulus by preserving the activity of the pro-survival
factor mef2d.
the mechanisms of glutamate toxicity and igf-i mediated
survival in pro-oligodendroblasts has revealed that in contrast to
igf-i mediated survival mechanisms in neurons, igf-i had no
effect on the influx or recovery of intracellular calcium levels or
on levels of major pro- and anti-apoptotic molecules including
bax or bcl-xl. rather, igf-i prevented caspase-3 activation in
these cells as long as 8 h after their exposure to glutamate,
suggesting that delayed activation of igf-i-mediated survival
pathways can block glutamate-mediated apoptosis in pro-
oligodendroblasts. thus, igf-i disrupts the glutamate-mediated
apoptotic pathway in these cells through mechanisms that are
distinct from its survival-promoting actions in neurons.
6.12. glucose stress
igf-i partially protected neuroblastoma cells from growth
retardation and decreased survival when they were cultured under
conditions of low glucose, and significantly suppressed mrna
levels of the apoptosis-related genes gadd45, fas, inos, nfκb,
trail, without further affecting bcl-2 expression. in low glucose,
igf-i acutely enhanced glucose transport and translocation of
glut1 transporter to the plasma membrane. glut1 mrna
expression was up-regulated by both igf-i and overexpression of
bcl-2. the common effect of both igf-i and bcl-2 overexpression
on enhancement of glut-1 expression suggests that this may be
an important mechanism for enhanced survival [190].
dysregulated igf-signaling has been implicated in numerous
human cancers, either from its role in stimulating mitogenesis,
motility and metastasis or its role in protecting against apoptosis.
as described above, igf-signaling may also protect from cytotoxic
drugs. consequently, the igf-1r has become a focus of drug
development (reviewed in [191–193]) with numerous potent small
molecule inhibitors, highly specific antibodies, or rnai/antisense
approaches being developed for clinical trials. the activities of,
adw742 [194–198] and aew541[199–203], two agents that
target the receptor kinase have been reported in many tumor
systems. similarly, antibodies directed at the igf-ir receptor
[149,204–211] or igf-ii [209] appear to have good activity both in
vitro and where tested, against tumor models in mice.
adw742, a pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine derivative is competi-
tive with atp binding and potently inhibits igf-ir in vitro kinase
activity (ic50 ∼01.–0.2 μm). one of the concerns with deve-
loping atp-competitive inhibitors of igf-ir is that such
compounds may not discriminate between the ir, and hence
induce a diabetic-like toxicity (hyperglycemia and hyperinsuli-
nemia). in vitro adw742 shows similar potency against both ir
and igf-ir, however of interest (and somewhat unexplained) is
that in cell lines there is a 15-fold differential for inhibition of ir
autophosphorylation [196]. the potential for treating small cell
lung cancer (sclc) cell lines with adw742 has been in-
vestigated. two populations of sclc lines were identified; those
that had both igf-i/igf-ir and stem cell factor (scf)/kit
autocrine growth loops and those that
lacked the scf/kit
pathway. the former lines were relatively resistant to adw742
(ic50 4–7 μm) concentrations of drug that also inhibited scf/kit
signaling. in contrast lines lacking scf/kit signaling were more
sensitive (ic50 0.1–0.5 μm). combination of adw742 with
imatinib (gleevec), an inhibitor of c-kit, was synergistic only in
sclc lines with active scf/kit signaling. importantly, this study
demonstrates the potential complexities of using specific inhi-
bitors of a single pathway, and demonstrates the necessity for
characterizing signaling pathways in tumors to achieve optimal
drug efficacy. the same group found that adw742 combined
with imatinib caused complete inhibition of phospho-akt, and
was synergistically toxic to cells exposed the etoposide [195].
adw742 and antibodies against igf-ir were found to block
serum-stimulated growth of multiple myeloma cell lines and
primary cultures [198]. in vivo daily treatment with adw742
extended life span of mice bearing human multiple myeloma,
although the effects were essentially cytostatic i.e. extension of
lifespan essentially paralleled the duration of treatment. the
efficacy of adw742 also appears to be schedule-dependent, as
treatment of mice for only 4 days per week showed no activity,
although on this schedule of administration it did potentiate the
effect of the bifunctional dna alkylating agent melphalan.
unsupervised hierarchical clustering analyses showed that gene
expression profiles of multiple myeloma cells treated with either
an anti-igfir antibody, or adw742 were unique from those
induced by other drugs. igf-ir inhibition induced downregula-
tion of several antiapoptotic proteins (mcl-1, survivin, ciap-2,
flip) but not bcl-2. similarly, a second generation igf-ir
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
15
inhibitor (aew541) [203] caused downregulation of antiapopto-
tic proteins including bcl-2, and increased bax in hepatocellular
carcinoma cells or cells derived from gastrointestinal neuroendo-
crine tumors [199,200]. however, apoptosis was associated with
relatively high concentrations of aew541, and as in cellular
assays kinases other than igf-ir and ir are inhibited [203] at
these concentrations the role of igf-ir inhibition may be
ambiguous. interestingly, cells derived from ewing sarcoma
appear to be highly sensitive to aew541 both in vitro and as
xenografts in mice. in addition aew541 potentiated the cytotoxic
activity of vincristine, actinomycin d and ifosfamide [202].
whether inhibition of igf-ir signaling may also induce toxicity
in humans remains to be tested. clearly there is a concern over
igf-ir-targeted agents inducing a diabetic syndrome, as do
inhibitors of pi3k or akt, although no changes in plasma
glucose or insulin were reported in mice treated with adw742.
another potential concern is the possibility of irreversible
impairment of neurological function as igfs appear to play an
important role in neuronal survival [191]. inhibition of igf-ir
may also have the potential to exacerbate hepatotoxicity when
bile flow may be impaired as aew541 promoted bile acid
toxicity in hepatocytes [212]. it is also worthwhile considering
whether interactions between igf-ir-targeted agents and classi-
cal cytotoxic agents is a consequence of igf-ir inhibition. for
example, both imatinib (a 2-phenylamino-pyrimidine derivative)
and erbb1-targeted agents, gefitinib and ci-1033 (4-anilino-
quinazolines) are potent inhibitors of the abcg2 drug transporter
[213–215], and probably other transporters associated with
multidrug resistance [216]. thus, these agents may well potentiate
antitumor activity of drugs associated with abc-transporter
mediated resistance (vincristine, etoposide, topotecan, etc.) in-
dependent of their primary tyrosine receptor kinase target.
consequently, it is probable that these agents may exacerbate
normal tissue toxicities of cytotoxic agents through igf-ir-
independent mechanisms.
high-affinity antibodies against igf-ir, however, should be
highly specific. like the tyrosine kinase inhibitors, antibodies
targeted to igf-ir inhibit ligand-induced autophosphorylation of
the receptor. however, unlike small molecule inhibitors, anti-
bodies prevent
ligand binding, and may induce receptor
internalization and degradation [149,205]. receptor downregula-
tion may be important for in vivo antitumor activity [210]. like
adw742 and aew541, anti-igfir antibodies inhibit cell
proliferation leading to an increase in the g1 fraction. interest-
ingly, in androgen-independent prostate cancer lines blocking
igf-ir downregulates androgen-related genes [207]. antibodies
directed to the igf-ir appear to have good in vivo activity against
a variety of human tumor xenografts in mice, particularly when
combined with standard cytotoxic agents. for example combined
with gemcitabine antibodies induced regressions of bxpc-3
pancreatic carcinoma models [206], or with 5-fluorouracil induced
prolonged regression of colo205 colon tumors [149]. although
igf-ir-targeted antibodies are unlikely to directly inhibit drug
transporters, as do atp-competitive inhibitors, down regulation of
akt signaling may abrogate abcg2 function, and potentially
other transporters may be regulated through igf-ir-mediated
signaling pathways. cohen et al. also reported development of a
surrogate biomarker for antibody activity, where igf-ir down-
regulation could be detected in human peripheral blood cells
[149]. one note of caution is that the antibodies are species
specific, hence may not reveal any exacerbation of toxicity when
combined with standard cytotoxic agents in mouse models.
combination of a chimeric humanized single chain antibody
combined with tamoxifen also demonstrated good activity in a
breast cancer xenograft model, providing evidence that
targeting both the igf-ir and estrogen receptor may enhance
therapeutic effect [217]. similarly, igf-ir signaling has been
reported to confer resistance to trastuzimab (herceptin), an
antibody that targets the her2 receptor [218]. igf-ir-irs-1
signaling appears to confer resistance to trastuzimab through
upregulation of skp2, a p27kip1 ubiquitin ligase, and subse-
quent degradation of p27kip1 [219]. expression of a dominant
negative igf-ir construct synergized with tratuzumab, sup-
porting the idea of dual inhibition of these receptors as a ther-
apeutic approach [220]. an alternative mechanism of igf-ir-
mediated tratuzumab resistance is formation of igf-ir/her2
heterodimeric receptors [221]. trastuzumab resistance was
partially reversed by inhibition of the igf-ir kinase function by
i-ome-ag538, but to a greater extent by the α-ir3 antibody
that disrupted the her2/ifg-ir interaction. other approaches to
increasing the therapeutic activity of igf-ir-directed antibodies
is the development of bispecific antibodies that target igf-ir
and erbb1 [222]. targeting receptor ligand rather than the
receptor per se has proven a valuable approach for the anti-
angiogenic antibody, bevituzimab (avastin), and high affinity
fully human antibodies have been developed against igf-ii
[223]. although no human results are currently available,
promising activity of igf-ir kinase inhibitors or antibodies in
preclinical models suggests that targeting this pathway alone, or
most likely in combination with other pathway inhibitors, or
combined with cytotoxic agents, may prove to be a useful the-
rapeutic strategy.
8. conclusions
igf-i and -ii appear to protect against both intrinsic and
extrinsic death stimuli; in many model systems igfs appear to
have a unique function as other factors, such as egf, fgf and
pdgf have little or no effect on survival. the most compelling
evidence that igfs have a physiologic role in protecting cells from
death comes from in vivo experiments where exogenous igfs
show clear protection from ischemia–reperfusion insults as well as
other trauma, and from experiments using primary tissue explants.
the plethora of data demonstrating protection of malignant cells
from cytotoxic agents, although numerically overwhelming, is less
compelling, and may be cell-context specific. a major concern is
whether igfs merely delay biochemical signs of apoptosis, but fail
to ultimately alter clonogenic survival. many studies are limited in
that data are presented for a single concentration of cytotoxic drug,
and a single time point for assessing protection has been presented.
consequently,
is not possible to understand whether the
protective effects of igfs occur over a broad range of drug
concentrations, or whether they merely delay morphologic and
biochemical signs of apoptosis. in the case of u.v. induced
it
16
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
damage, such a delay in commitment appears to allow resolution
of thymine dimers in dna, resulting in increased survival and
clonogenic potential. potentially, such a delay in commitment to
apoptosis could allow resolution of other forms of dna damage,
although there is little published biochemical data to support this.
whether this is a general phenomenon is obscured by the reliance
on biochemical and morphological criteria for apoptosis rather
than more rigorous assays such as clonogenic survival. one also
has to be concerned that in vitro studies, particularly those that use
monolayer culture, may generate results that cannot be translated
to in vivo systems. perhaps of immediate importance and a
challenge for the future will be determination of the role of igf-ir
signaling in protection of tumor stem cells from cytotoxic agents or
physiological stress. with the development of highly specific
antibodies that bind and inactivate the igf-ir it should be possible
to critically define the role of igf signaling in tumor growth, stem
cell survival, and response to genotoxic damage. although less
specific than antibodies,
the development of small molecule
inhibitors of the igf-ir will also allow for elucidation of a
definitive role for igf-ir signaling in tumor growth and survival
and to assess the role of igf-ir mediated signaling in response to
cytotoxic agents under in vivo conditions.
acknowledgments
supported by ca23099, ca96696, ca77776, ca21675
(cancer center support grant) and by american, lebanese, syrian
associated charities (alsac).
references
[1] r.j. barnard, w.j. aronson, c.n. tymchuk, t.h. ngo, prostate cancer:
another aspect of the insulin-resistance syndrome? obes. rev. 3 (2002)
303–308.
[2] m.s. sandhu, insulin-like growth factor-i and risk of type 2 diabetes and
coronary heart disease: molecular epidemiology, endocr. dev. 9 (2005)
44–54.
[3] r. durai, w. yang, s. gupta, a.m. seifalian, m.c. winslet, the role of
the insulin-like growth factor system in colorectal cancer: review of
current knowledge, int. j. colorectal dis. 20 (2005) 203–220.
[4] c. cocca, m. nunez, a. gutierrez, g. martin, g. cricco, v. medina, n.
mohamad, e. rivera, r. bergoc, igf-i in mammary tumorigenesis and
diabetes, anticancer res. 24 (2004) 2953–2965.
[5] c. fottner, a. hoeflich, e. wolf, m.m. weber, role of the insulin-like
growth factor system in adrenocortical growth control and carcinogen-
esis, horm. metab. res. 36 (2004) 397–405.
[6] l. jerome, l. shiry, b. leyland-jones, deregulation of the igf axis in
cancer: epidemiological evidence and potential therapeutic interventions,
endocr. relat. cancer 10 (2003) 561–578.
[7] c.t. roberts jr., igf-1 and prostate cancer, novartis found. symp. 262
(2004) 193–199 (discussion 199–204, 265–8).
[8] d. leroith, c.t. roberts jr., the insulin-like growth factor system and
cancer, cancer lett. 195 (2003) 127–137.
[9] s.g. gray, i. stenfeldt mathiasen, p. de meyts, the insulin-like growth
factors and insulin-signalling systems: an appealing target for breast
cancer therapy? horm. metab. res. 35 (2003) 857–871.
[10] j.g. scharf, f. dombrowski, r. novosyadlyy, c. eisenbach, i. demori,
b. kubler, t. braulke, insulin-like growth factor (igf)-binding protein-1
is highly induced during acute carbon tetrachloride liver injury and
potentiates the igf-i-stimulated activation of rat hepatic stellate cells,
endocrinology 145 (2004) 3463–3472.
[11] j.g. scharf, w. schmidt-sandte, s.a. pahernik, g. ramadori, t.
braulke, h. hartmann, characterization of the insulin-like growth factor
axis in a human hepatoma cell line (plc), carcinogenesis 19 (1998)
2121–2128.
[12] p.e. lonning, s.i. helle, igf-1 and breast cancer, novartis found. symp.
262 (2004) 205–212 (discussion 212–4, 265–8).
[13] j.m. gross, d. yee, the type-1 insulin-like growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase and breast cancer: biology and therapeutic relevance,
cancer metastasis rev. 22 (2003) 327–336.
[14] w. zumkeller, the insulin-like growth factor system in hematopoietic
cells, leuk. lymphoma 43 (2002) 487–491.
[15] w. zumkeller, m. schwab,
insulin-like growth factor system in
neuroblastoma tumorigenesis and apoptosis: potential diagnostic and
therapeutic perspectives, horm. metab. res. 31 (1999) 138–141.
[16] w. zumkeller, m. westphal, the igf/igfbp system in cns malignancy,
mol. pathol. 54 (2001) 227–229.
[17] v. vella, g. pandini, l. sciacca, r. mineo, r. vigneri, v. pezzino, a.
belfiore, a novel autocrine loop involving igf-ii and the insulin receptor
isoform-a stimulates growth of thyroid cancer, j. clin. endocrinol.
metab. 87 (2002) 245–254.
[18] v. vella, l. sciacca, g. pandini, r. mineo, s. squatrito, r. vigneri, a.
belfiore, the igf system in thyroid cancer: new concepts, mol. pathol.
54 (2001) 121–124.
[19] c. alexia, g. fallot, m. lasfer, g. schweizer-groyer, a. groyer, an
evaluation of the role of insulin-like growth factors (igf) and of type-i
igf receptor signalling in hepatocarcinogenesis and in the resistance of
hepatocarcinoma cells against drug-induced apoptosis, biochem. phar-
macol. 68 (2004) 1003–1015.
[20] d.d. pravtcheva, t.l. wise, metastasizing mammary carcinomas in h19
enhancers-igf2 transgenic mice, j. exp. zool. 281 (1998) 43–57.
[21] w. wang, p. kumar, w. wang, j. epstein, l. helman, j.v. moore, s.
kumar, insulin-like growth factor ii and pax3-fkhr cooperate in the
oncogenesis of rhabdomyosarcoma, cancer res. 58 (1998) 4426–4433.
[22] p. brodt, l. fallavollita, a.m. khatib, a.a. samani, d. zhang,
cooperative regulation of the invasive and metastatic phenotypes by
different domains of the type i insulin-like growth factor receptor beta
subunit, j. biol. chem. 276 (2001) 33608–33615.
[23] j.e. boehm, o.v. chaika, r.e. lewis, anti-apoptotic signaling by a
colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor/insulin receptor chimera with a
juxtamembrane deletion, j. biol. chem. 273 (1998) 7169–7176.
[24] m. dews, m. prisco, f. peruzzi, g. romano, a. morrione, r. baserga,
domains of the insulin-like growth factor i receptor required for the
activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases, endocrinology 141
(2000) 1289–1300.
[25] f. peruzzi, m. prisco, m. dews, p. salomoni, e. grassilli, g. romano, b.
calabretta, r. baserga, multiple signaling pathways of the insulin-like
growth factor 1 receptor in protection from apoptosis, mol. cell. biol. 19
(1999) 7203–7215.
[26] m. prisco, g. romano, f. peruzzi, b. valentinis, r. baserga, insulin and
igf-i receptors signaling in protection from apoptosis, horm. metab.
res. 31 (1999) 80–89.
[27] b. valentinis, a. morrione, f. peruzzi, m. prisco, k. reiss, r. baserga,
anti-apoptotic signaling of the igf-i receptor in fibroblasts following
loss of matrix adhesion, oncogene 18 (1999) 1827–1836.
[28] b. valentinis, g. romano, f. peruzzi, a. morrione, m. prisco, s. soddu,
b. cristofanelli, a. sacchi, r. baserga, growth and differentiation signals
by the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor in hemopoietic cells are
mediated through different pathways, j. biol. chem. 274 (1999)
12423–12430.
[29] b. urso, c.u. niesler, s. o'rahilly, k. siddle, comparison of anti-
apoptotic signalling by the insulin receptor and igf-i receptor in
preadipocytes and adipocytes, cell signal 13 (2001) 279–285.
[30] s. tanaka, j.r. wands, insulin receptor substrate 1 overexpression in
human hepatocellular carcinoma cells prevents transforming growth
factor beta1-induced apoptosis, cancer res. 56 (1996) 3391–3394.
[31] g. rodriguez-tarduchy, m.k. collins, i. garcia, a. lopez-rivas, insulin-
like growth factor-i inhibits apoptosis in il-3-dependent hemopoietic cells,
j. immunol. 149 (1992) 535–540.
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
17
[32] c.n. pagel, m.r. de niese, l.a. abraham, c. chinni, s.j. song, r.n.
pike, e.j. mackie, inhibition of osteoblast apoptosis by thrombin, bone
33 (2003) 733–743.
[33] e.a. harrington, m.r. bennett, a. fanidi, g.i. evan, c-myc-induced
apoptosis in fibroblasts is inhibited by specific cytokines, embo j. 13
(1994) 3286–3295.
[34] a. geier, r. beery, m. haimsohn, r. hemi, z. malik, a. karasik,
epidermal growth factor, phorbol esters, and aurintricarboxylic acid are
survival factors for mda-231 cells exposed to adriamycin, in vitro cell
dev. biol., anim. 30a (1994) 867–874.
[35] a. mooney, t. jobson, r. bacon, m. kitamura, j. savill, cytokines
promote glomerular mesangial cell survival
in vitro by stimulus-
dependent inhibition of apoptosis, j. immunol. 159 (1997) 3949–3960.
[36] k. fukunaga, t. kawano, akt is a molecular target for signal transduction
therapy in brain ischemic insult, j. pharmacol. sci. 92 (2003) 317–327.
[37] j. guan, l. bennet, p.d. gluckman, a.j. gunn, insulin-like growth factor-1
and post-ischemic brain injury, prog. neurobiol. 70 (2003) 443–462.
[38] i. kazanis, e. bozas, h. philippidis, f. stylianopoulou, neuroprotective
effects of insulin-like growth factor-i (igf-i) following a penetrating
brain injury in rats, brain res. 991 (2003) 34–45.
[39] p. kermer, r. ankerhold, n. klocker, s. krajewski, j.c. reed, m. bahr,
caspase-9: involvement in secondary death of axotomized rat retinal
ganglion cells in vivo, brain res. mol. brain res. 85 (2000) 144–150.
[40] m. mathonnet, i. comte, f. lalloue, c. ayer-le lievre, insulin-like
growth factor i induced survival of axotomized olfactory neurons in the
chick, neurosci. lett. 308 (2001) 67–70.
[41] g. gutierrez-ospina, a. gutierrez de la barrera, j. larriva, m. giordano,
insulin-like growth factor i partly prevents axon elimination in the
neonate rat optic nerve, neurosci. lett. 325 (2002) 207–210.
[42] g. gobe, x.j. zhang, l. cuttle, b. pat, d. willgoss, j. hancock, r.
barnard, r.b. endre, bcl-2 genes and growth factors in the pathology of
ischaemic acute renal failure, immunol. cell biol. 77 (1999) 279–286.
[43] g. gobe, x.j. zhang, d.a. willgoss, e. schoch, n.a. hogg, z.h. endre,
relationship between expression of bcl-2 genes and growth factors in
ischemic acute renal failure in the rat, j. am. soc. nephrol. 11 (2000)
454–467.
[44] s.c. kiley, b.a. thornhill, s.s. tang, j.r. ingelfinger, r.l. chevalier,
growth factor-mediated phosphorylation of proapoptotic bad reduces
tubule cell death in vitro and in vivo, kidney int. 63 (2003) 33–42.
[45] s. klahr, urinary tract obstruction, semin. nephrol. 21 (2001) 133–145.
[46] g. gomez, h.m. lee, q. he, e.w. englander, t. uchida, g.h. greeley jr.,
acute pancreatitis signals activation of apoptosis-associated and survival
genes in mice, exp. biol. med. (maywood) 226 (2001) 692–700.
[47] j.c. cool, j.l. dyer, c.j. xian, r.n. butler, m.s. geier, g.s. howarth,
pre-treatment with insulin-like growth factor-i partially ameliorates 5-
fluorouracil-induced intestinal mucositis in rats, growth horm. igf res.
15 (2005) 72–82.
[48] d.j. hill, j. petrik, e. arany, t.j. mcdonald, t.l. delovitch, insulin-like
growth factors prevent cytokine-mediated cell death in isolated islets of
langerhans from pre-diabetic non-obese diabetic mice, j. endocrinol.
161 (1999) 153–165.
[49] k. raile, a. berthold, u. banning, f. horn, g. pfeiffer, w. kiess, igfs,
basic fgf, and glucose modulate proliferation and apoptosis induced by
ifngamma but not by il-1beta in rat ins-1e beta-cells, horm. metab.
res. 35 (2003) 407–414.
[50] d. decraene, p. agostinis, r. bouillon, h. degreef, m. garmyn, insulin-
like growth factor-1-mediated akt activation postpones the onset of
ultraviolet b-induced apoptosis, providing more time for cyclobutane
thymine dimer removal in primary human keratinocytes, j. biol. chem.
277 (2002) 32587–32595.
[51] c. kuhn, s.a. hurwitz, m.g. kumar, j. cotton, d.f. spandau, activation
of the insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor promotes the survival of
human keratinocytes following ultraviolet b irradiation, int. j. cancer 80
(1999) 431–438.
[52] a. eichten, d.s. rud, m. grace, s.o. piboonniyom, v. zacny, k.
munger, molecular pathways executing the “trophic sentinel” response in
hpv-16 e7-expressing normal human diploid fibroblasts upon growth
factor deprivation, virology 319 (2004) 81–93.
[53] y. xu, q. nguyen, d.c. lo, m.j. czaja, c-myc-dependent hepatoma cell
apoptosis results from oxidative stress and not a deficiency of growth
factors, j. cell. physiol. 170 (1997) 192–199.
[54] j. han, c. flemington, a.b. houghton, z. gu, g.p. zambetti, r.j. lutz,
l. zhu, t. chittenden, expression of bbc3, a pro-apoptotic bh3-only
gene, is regulated by diverse cell death and survival signals, proc. natl.
acad. sci. u. s. a. 98 (2001) 11318–11323.
[55] h. matsuzaki, m. tamatani, n. mitsuda, k. namikawa, h. kiyama, s.
miyake, m. tohyama, activation of akt kinase inhibits apoptosis and
changes in bcl-2 and bax expression induced by nitric oxide in primary
hippocampal neurons, j. neurochem. 73 (1999) 2037–2046.
[56] a. yamaguchi, m. tamatani, h. matsuzaki, k. namikawa, h. kiyama,
m.p. vitek, n. mitsuda, m. tohyama, akt activation protects hippo-
campal neurons from apoptosis by inhibiting transcriptional activity of
p53, j. biol. chem. 276 (2001) 5256–5264.
[57] r. vento, n. d'alessandro, m. giuliano, m. lauricella, m. carabillo, g.
tesoriere,
induction of apoptosis by arachidonic acid in human
retinoblastoma y79 cells: involvement of oxidative stress, exp. eye
res. 70 (2000) 503–517.
[58] r. kurzawa, w. glabowski, t. baczkowski, p. brelik, evaluation of
mouse preimplantation embryos exposed to oxidative stress cultured with
insulin-like growth factor i and ii, epidermal growth factor, insulin,
transferrin and selenium, reprod. biol. 2 (2002) 143–162.
[59] r. kurzawa, w. glabowski, t. baczkowski, b. wiszniewska, m.
marchlewicz, growth factors protect in vitro cultured embryos from
the consequences of oxidative stress, zygote 12 (2004) 231–240.
[60] j. pifer, r.p. stephan, d.a. lill-elghanian, p.t. le, p.l. witte, role of
stromal cells and their products in protecting young and aged b-lineage
precursors from dexamethasone-induced apoptosis, mech. ageing dev.
124 (2003) 207–218.
[61] j.r. singleton, b.l. baker, a. thorburn, dexamethasone inhibits insulin-
like growth factor signaling and potentiates myoblast apoptosis,
endocrinology 141 (2000) 2945–2950.
[62] s. humez, g. legrand, f. vanden-abeele, m. monet, p. marchetti, g.
lepage, a. crepin, e. dewailly, f. wuytack, n. prevarskaya, role
of endoplasmic reticulum calcium content
in prostate cancer cell
growth regulation by igf and tnfalpha, j. cell. physiol. 201 (2004)
201–213.
[63] c.u. niesler, b. urso, j.b. prins, k. siddle, igf-i inhibits apoptosis
induced by serum withdrawal, but potentiates tnf-alpha-induced
apoptosis, in 3t3-l1 preadipocytes, j. endocrinol. 167 (2000) 165–174.
[64] e.j. foulstone, k.a. meadows, j.m. holly, c.e. stewart, insulin-like
growth factors (igf-i and igf-ii)
inhibit c2 skeletal myoblast
differentiation and enhance tnf alpha-induced apoptosis, j. cell physiol.
189 (2001) 207–215.
[65] p. storz, h. doppler, j. horn-muller, g. muller, k. pfizenmaier, tnf down-
regulation of receptor tyrosine kinase-dependent mitogenic signal pathways
as an important step in cytostasis induction and commitment to apoptosis of
kym-1 rhabdomyosarcoma cells, cell death differ. 7 (2000) 955–965.
[66] c.e. gidding, g.s. germain, m.b. dilling, t.g. meeuwsen-de boer, r.a.
ashmun, s.s. de graaf, k.a. veverka, w.a. kamps, p.j. houghton, the
influence of recombinant human insulin-like growth factor-i (rhigf-i) on cell
growth and cytotoxicity of drugs in childhood rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines
and xenograft models, cancer chemother. pharmacol. 45 (2000) 21–30.
[67] c. sell, r. baserga, r. rubin, insulin-like growth factor i (igf-i) and the
igf-i receptor prevent etoposide-induced apoptosis, cancer res. 55
(1995) 303–306.
[68] b.j. gwag, l.m. canzoniero, s.l. sensi, j.a. demaro, j.y. koh, m.p.
goldberg, m. jacquin, d.w. choi, calcium ionophores can induce either
apoptosis or necrosis in cultured cortical neurons, neuroscience 90
(1999) 1339–1348.
[69] b.j. gwag, j.y. koh, j.a. demaro, h.s. ying, m. jacquin, d.w. choi,
slowly triggered excitotoxicity occurs by necrosis in cortical cultures,
neuroscience 77 (1997) 393–401.
[70] b. li, m. setoguchi, x. wang, a.m. andreoli, a. leri, a. malhotra, j.
kajstura, p. anversa,
insulin-like growth factor-1 attenuates the
detrimental impact of nonocclusive coronary artery constriction on the
heart, circ. res. 84 (1999) 1007–1019.
18
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
[71] m. tezuka, h. watanabe, s. nakamura, d. yu, w. aung, t. sasaki, h.
shibuya, m. miura, antiapoptotic activity is dispensable for insulin-like
growth factor
receptor-mediated clonogenic radioresistance after
gamma-irradiation, clin. cancer res. 7 (2001) 3206–3214.
[72] n.j. mccarthy, m.k. whyte, c.s. gilbert, g.i. evan, inhibition of ced-3/
ice-related proteases does not prevent cell death induced by oncogenes,
dna damage, or the bcl-2 homologue bak, j. cell biol. 136 (1997)
215–227.
[73] d.l. brown, w.w. kao, d.g. greenhalgh, apoptosis down-regulates
inflammation under the advancing epithelial wound edge: delayed
patterns in diabetes and improvement with topical growth factors,
surgery 121 (1997) 372–380.
[74] l. del peso, m. gonzalez-garcia, c. page, r. herrera, g. nunez,
interleukin-3-induced phosphorylation of bad through the protein
kinase akt, science 278 (1997) 687–689.
[75] k.s. shindler, c.b. latham, k.a. roth, bax deficiency prevents the
increased cell death of immature neurons in bcl-x-deficient mice,
j. neurosci. 17 (1997) 3112–3119.
[76] j. zha, h. harada, e. yang, j. jockel, s.j. korsmeyer, serine
phosphorylation of death agonist bad in response to survival factor
results in binding to 14-3-3 not bcl-x(l), cell 87 (1996) 619–628.
[77] s.r. datta, a.m. ranger, m.z. lin, j.f. sturgill, y.c. ma, c.w. cowan,
p. dikkes, s.j. korsmeyer, m.e. greenberg, survival factor-mediated
bad phosphorylation raises the mitochondrial threshold for apoptosis,
dev. cell 3 (2002) 631–643.
[78] h. bai, m.j. pollman, y. inishi, g.h. gibbons, regulation of vascular
smooth muscle cell apoptosis. modulation of bad by a phosphatidylino-
sitol 3-kinase-dependent pathway, circ. res. 85 (1999) 229–237.
[79] y. leverrier, j. thomas, a.l. mathieu, w. low, b. blanquier, j. marvel,
role of pi3-kinase in bcl-x induction and apoptosis inhibition mediated
by il-3 or igf-1 in baf-3 cells, cell death differ. 6 (1999) 290–296.
[80] m. parrizas, d. leroith, insulin-like growth factor-1 inhibition of
apoptosis is associated with increased expression of the bcl-xl gene
product, endocrinology 138 (1997) 1355–1358.
[81] c. minshall, s. arkins, j. straza, j. conners, r. dantzer, g.g. freund, k.w.
kelley, il-4 and insulin-like growth factor-i inhibit the decline in bcl-2 and
promote the survival of il-3-deprived myeloid progenitors, j. immunol. 159
(1997) 1225–1232.
[82] d.a. linseman, r.a. phelps, r.j. bouchard, s.s. le, t.a. laessig, m.l.
mcclure, k.a. heidenreich, insulin-like growth factor-i blocks bcl-2
interacting mediator of cell death (bim) induction and intrinsic death
signaling in cerebellar granule neurons, j. neurosci. 22 (2002) 9287–9297.
[83] y. toyoshima, m. karas, s. yakar, j. dupont, h. lee, d. leroith,
tdag51 mediates the effects of insulin-like growth factor i (igf-i) on
cell survival, j. biol. chem. 279 (2004) 25898–25904.
[84] h.l. cheng, m.l. steinway, x. xin, e.l. feldman, insulin-like growth
factor-i and bcl-x(l) inhibit c-jun n-terminal kinase activation and
rescue schwann cells from apoptosis, j. neurochem. 76 (2001)
935–943.
[85] v. levresse, l. butterfield, e. zentrich, l.e. heasley, akt negatively
regulates the cjun n-terminal kinase pathway in pc12 cells, j. neurosci.
res. 62 (2000) 799–808.
[86] c.l. delaney, h.l. cheng, e.l. feldman, insulin-like growth factor-i
prevents caspase-mediated apoptosis in schwann cells, j. neurobiol. 41
(1999) 540–548.
[87] a. hurbin, j.l. coll, l. dubrez-daloz, b. mari, p. auberger, c.
brambilla, m.c. favrot, cooperation of amphiregulin and insulin-like
growth factor-1 inhibits bax- and bad-mediated apoptosis via a protein
kinase c-dependent pathway in non-small cell lung cancer cells, j. biol.
chem. 280 (2005) 19757–19767.
[88] d. krause, a. lyons, c. fennelly, r. o'connor, transient activation of
jun n-terminal kinases and protection from apoptosis by the insulin-like
growth factor i receptor can be suppressed by dicumarol, j. biol. chem.
276 (2001) 19244–19252.
[89] j. ratajczak, m. majka, j. kijowski, m. baj, z.k. pan, l.a. marquez, a.
janowska-wieczorek, m.z. ratajczak, biological significance of mapk,
akt and jak-stat protein activation by various erythropoietic factors in
normal human early erythroid cells, br. j. haematol. 115 (2001) 195–204.
[90] m. yamada, k. tanabe, k. wada, k. shimoke, y. ishikawa, t. ikeuchi, s.
koizumi, h. hatanaka, differences in survival-promoting effects and
intracellular signaling properties of bdnf and igf-1 in cultured cerebral
cortical neurons, j. neurochem. 78 (2001) 940–951.
[91] j.w. russell, a.j. windebank, a. schenone, e.l. feldman, insulin-like
growth factor-i prevents apoptosis in neurons after nerve growth factor
withdrawal, j. neurobiol. 36 (1998) 455–467.
[92] k. martensson, d. chrysis, l. savendahl, interleukin-1beta and tnf-
alpha act in synergy to inhibit longitudinal growth in fetal rat metatarsal
bones, j. bone miner. res. 19 (2004) 1805–1812.
[93] a. ortiz, c. lorz, s. gonzalez-cuadrado, r. garcia del moral, f. o'valle,
j. egido, cytokines and fas regulate apoptosis in murine renal interstitial
fibroblasts, j. am. soc. nephrol. 8 (1997) 1845–1854.
[94] y. wu, m. tewari, s. cui, r. rubin, activation of the insulin-like growth
factor-i receptor inhibits tumor necrosis factor-induced cell death, j. cell.
physiol. 168 (1996) 499–509.
[95] r. rajah, k.w. lee, p. cohen, insulin-like growth factor binding
protein-3 mediates
factor-alpha-induced apoptosis:
role of bcl-2 phosphorylation, cell growth differ. 13 (2002)
163–171.
tumor necrosis
[96] r. aikin, l. rosenberg, d. maysinger, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
signaling to akt mediates survival in isolated canine islets of langerhans,
biochem. biophys. res. commun. 277 (2000) 455–461.
[97] s.m. quirk, r.m. harman, r.g. cowan, regulation of fas antigen (fas,
cd95)-mediated apoptosis of bovine granulosa cells by serum and
growth factors, biol. reprod. 63 (2000) 1278–1284.
[98] m.m. remacle-bonnet, f.l. garrouste, s. heller, f. andre, j.l. marvaldi,
g.j. pommier, insulin-like growth factor-i protects colon cancer cells from
death factor-induced apoptosis by potentiating tumor necrosis factor alpha-
induced mitogen-activated protein kinase and nuclear factor kappab
signaling pathways, cancer res. 60 (2000) 2007–2017.
[99] m.e. burow, c.b. weldon, b.m. collins-burow, n. ramsey, a. mckee,
a. klippel, j.a. mclachlan, s. clejan, b.s. beckman, cross-talk
between phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and sphingomyelinase pathways
as a mechanism for cell survival/death decisions, j. biol. chem. 275
(2000) 9628–9635.
[100] p. bernabei, m. bosticardo, g. losana, g. regis, f. di paola, s. de
angelis, m. giovarelli, f. novelli, igf-1 down-regulates ifn-gamma r2
chain surface expression and desensitizes ifn-gamma/stat-1 signaling
in human t lymphocytes, blood 102 (2003) 2933–2939.
[101] w.h. shen, j.h. zhou, s.r. broussard, g.g. freund, r. dantzer, k.w.
kelley, proinflammatory cytokines block growth of breast cancer cells by
impairing signals from a growth factor receptor, cancer res. 62 (2002)
4746–4756.
[102] h.d. venters, r. dantzer, k.w. kelley, a new concept in neurodegenera-
tion: tnfalpha is a silencer of survival signals, trends neurosci. 23
(2000) 175–180.
[103] r.s. nicholas, s. stevens, m.g. wing, d.a. compston, microglia-
derived igf-2 prevents tnfalpha induced death of mature oligoden-
drocytes in vitro, j. neuroimmunol. 124 (2002) 36–44.
[104] c. sanz, y. leon, s. canon, l. alvarez, f. giraldez, i. varela-nieto,
pattern of expression of the jun family of transcription factors during the
early development of the inner ear: implications in apoptosis, j. cell sci.
112 (pt 22) (1999) 3967–3974.
[105] p. kenchappa, a. yadav, g. singh, s. nandana, k. banerjee, rescue of
tnfalpha-inhibited neuronal cells by igf-1 involves akt and c-jun n-
terminal kinases, j. neurosci. res. 76 (2004) 466–474.
[106] s.m. frisch, h. francis, disruption of epithelial cell–matrix interactions
induces apoptosis, j. cell biol. 124 (1994) 619–626.
[107] b. valentinis, k. reiss, r. baserga, insulin-like growth factor-i-mediated
survival from anoikis: role of cell aggregation and focal adhesion kinase,
j. cell. physiol. 176 (1998) 648–657.
[108] j.t. yu, r.g. foster, d.c. dean, transcriptional repression by rb-e2f
and regulation of anchorage-independent survival, mol. cell. biol. 21
(2001) 3325–3335.
[109] l.a. maile, w.h. busby, k. sitko, b.e. capps, t. sergent, j. badley-
clarke, d.r. clemmons, insulin-like growth factor-i signaling in smooth
muscle cells is regulated by ligand binding to the 177cydmkttc184
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
19
sequence of the beta3-subunit of alphavbeta3, mol. endocrinol. 20
(2006) 405–443.
[110] d.r. clemmons, l.a. maile, interaction between insulin-like growth factor-
i receptor and alphavbeta3 integrin linked signaling pathways: cellular
responses to changes in multiple signaling inputs, mol. endocrinol. 19
(2005) 1–11.
[111] m. kwon, y. ling, l.a. maile, j. badley-clark, d.r. clemmons,
recruitment of the tyrosine phosphatase src homology 2 domain tyrosine
phosphatase-2 to the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3 (pi-3) kinase
is required for
insulin-like growth factor-i-dependent pi-3 kinase
activation in smooth muscle cells, endocrinology 147 (2006) 1458–1465.
[112] a. oh, h.j. list, r. reiter, a. mani, y. zhang, e. gehan, a. wellstein, a.t.
riegel, the nuclear receptor coactivator aib1 mediates insulin-like growth
factor i-induced phenotypic changes in human breast cancer cells, cancer
res. 64 (2004) 8299–8308.
[113] c.e. wrede, l.m. dickson, m.k. lingohr, i. briaud, c.j. rhodes, protein
kinase b/akt prevents fatty acid-induced apoptosis in pancreatic beta-
cells (ins-1), j. biol. chem. 277 (2002) 49676–49684.
[114] c.c. o'shea, s. choi, f. mccormick, d. stokoe, adenovirus overrides
cellular checkpoints for protein translation, cell cycle 4 (2005) 883–888.
[115] h.u. simon, a. haj-yehia, f. levi-schaffer, role of reactive oxygen
species (ros) in apoptosis induction, apoptosis 5 (2000) 415–418.
[116] k. kannan, s.k. jain, oxidative stress and apoptosis, pathophysiology 7
(2000) 153–163.
[117] s. wedgwood, s.m. black, role of reactive oxygen species in vascular
remodeling associated with pulmonary hypertension, antioxid. redox
signal. 5 (2003) 759–769.
[118] t. sakamoto, w.t. repasky, k. uchida, a. hirata, f. hirata, modulation
of cell death pathways to apoptosis and necrosis of h2o2-treated rat
thymocytes by lipocortin i, biochem. biophys. res. commun. 220
(1996) 643–647.
[119] t. abe, y. hara, y. abe, y. aida, k. maeda, serum or growth factor
deprivation induces the expression of alkaline phosphatase in human
gingival fibroblasts, j. dent. res. 77 (1998) 1700–1707.
[120] m.v. clement, i. stamenkovic, superoxide anion is a natural inhibitor of
fas-mediated cell death, embo j. 15 (1996) 216–225.
[121] k.m. lin, c.a. ternent, d.r. adams, a.g. thorson, g.j. blatchford, m.a.
christensen, p. watson, h.t. lynch, colorectal cancer in hereditary breast
cancer kindreds, dis. colon rectum 42 (1999) 1041–1045.
[122] s.s. brar, z. corbin, t.p. kennedy, r. hemendinger, l. thornton, b.
bommarius, r.s. arnold, a.r. whorton, a.b. sturrock, t.p. huecksteadt,
m.t. quinn, k. krenitsky, k.g. ardie, j.d. lambeth, j.r. hoidal, nox5
nad(p)h oxidase regulates growth and apoptosis in du 145 prostate
cancer cells, am. j. physiol. cell physiol. 285 (2003) c353–c369.
[123] w. davis jr., z. ronai, k.d. tew, cellular thiols and reactive oxygen
species in drug-induced apoptosis, j. pharmacol. exp. ther. 296 (2001)
1–6.
[124] x. lin, r.f. bulleit, insulin-like growth factor i (igf-i) is a critical
trophic factor for developing cerebellar granule cells, brain res. dev.
brain res. 99 (1997) 234–242.
[125] d.r. green, death and nf-kappab in t cell activation: life at the edge,
mol. cell 11 (2003) 551–552.
[126] c. garrido, s. gurbuxani, l. ravagnan, g. kroemer, heat shock proteins:
endogenous modulators of apoptotic cell death, biochem. biophys. res.
commun. 286 (2001) 433–442.
[127] m. tamatani, s. ogawa, m. tohyama, roles of bcl-2 and caspases in
hypoxia-induced neuronal cell death: a possible neuroprotective mecha-
nism of peptide growth factors, brain res. mol. brain res. 58 (1998)
27–39.
[128] x. wang, j. deng, d.w. boyle, j. zhong, w.h. lee, potential role of igf-
i in hypoxia tolerance using a rat hypoxic-ischemic model: activation of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha, pediatr. res. 55 (2004) 385–394.
[129] m. tagami, k. yamagata, k. ikeda, h. fujino, y. nara, k. nakagawa, a.
kubota, f. numano, y. yamori, genetic vulnerability of cortical neurons
isolated from stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats in hypoxia
and oxygen reperfusion, hypertens. res. 22 (1999) 23–29.
[130] f.b. mehrhof, f.u. muller, m.w. bergmann, p. li, y. wang, w. schmitz,
r. dietz, r. von harsdorf, in cardiomyocyte hypoxia, insulin-like growth
factor-i-induced antiapoptotic signaling requires phosphatidylinositol-3-
oh-kinase-dependent and mitogen-activated protein kinase-dependent
activation of the transcription factor camp response element-binding
protein, circulation 104 (2001) 2088–2094.
[131] s. kothari, j. cizeau, e. mcmillan-ward, s.j. israels, m. bailes, k. ens,
l.a. kirshenbaum, s.b. gibson, bnip3 plays a role in hypoxic cell death
in human epithelial cells that is inhibited by growth factors egf and igf,
oncogene 22 (2003) 4734–4744.
[132] a.c. koong, n.c. denko, k.m. hudson, c. schindler, l. swiersz, c.
koch, s. evans, h. ibrahim, q.t. le, d.j. terris, a.j. giaccia, candidate
genes for the hypoxic tumor phenotype, cancer res. 60 (2000) 883–887.
[133] g. kulik, a. klippel, m.j. weber, antiapoptotic signalling by the insulin-
like growth factor i receptor, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and akt,
mol. cell. biol. 17 (1997) 1595–1606.
[134] j.m. brown, b.g. wouters, apoptosis, p53, and tumor cell sensitivity to
anticancer agents, cancer res. 59 (1999) 1391–1399.
[135] j.m. brown, l.d. attardi, the role of apoptosis in cancer development
and treatment response, nat. rev. cancer 5 (2005) 231–237.
[136] h.a. ferguson, p.m. marietta, c.l. van den berg, uv-induced apoptosis
is mediated independent of caspase-9 in mcf-7 cells: a model for
cytochrome c resistance, j. biol. chem. 278 (2003) 45793–45800.
[137] l.m. frago, y. leon, e.j. de la rosa, a. gomez-munoz, i. varela-nieto,
nerve growth factor and ceramides modulate cell death in the early
developing inner ear, j. cell sci. 111 (pt 5) (1998) 549–556.
[138] e. bieberich, s. mackinnon, j. silva, r.k. yu, regulation of apoptosis
during neuronal differentiation by ceramide and b-series complex
gangliosides, j. biol. chem. 276 (2001) 44396–44404.
[139] c.e. stewart, p.v. newcomb, p.b. savage, m. dickens, j. tavare, j.m.
holly, increased, not decreased activation of the insulin-like growth
factor
receptor signalling pathway during ceramide-induced
apoptosis, growth horm. igf res. 9 (1999) 131–142.
(igf)
[140] c.e. stewart, r. mihai, j.m. holly, increased tyrosine kinase activity but
not calcium mobilization is required for ceramide-induced apoptosis,
exp. cell res. 250 (1999) 329–338.
[141] y.e. whang, x.j. yuan, y. liu, s. majumder, t.d. lewis, regulation of
sensitivity to trail by the pten tumor suppressor, vitam. horm. 67
(2004) 409–426.
[142] c.l. hu, r.g. cowan, r.m. harman, s.m. quirk, cell cycle progression
and activation of akt kinase are required for insulin-like growth factor i-
mediated suppression of apoptosis in granulosa cells, mol. endocrinol. 18
(2004) 326–338.
[143] j.l. rohn, a.o. hueber, n.j. mccarthy, d. lyon, p. navarro, b.m.
burgering, g.i. evan, the opposing roles of the akt and c-myc signalling
pathways in survival from cd95-mediated apoptosis, oncogene 17 (1998)
2811–2818.
[144] v. poulaki, c.s. mitsiades, v. kotoula, s. tseleni-balafouta, a.
ashkenazi, d.a. koutras, n. mitsiades, regulation of apo2l/tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand-induced apoptosis in
thyroid carcinoma cells, am. j. pathol. 161 (2002) 643–654.
[145] r. fraser, c. frisby, l.a. blackshaw, m. schirmer, g. howarth, e. yeoh,
small intestinal dysmotility following abdominal irradiation in the rat
small intestine, neurogastroenterol. motil. 10 (1998) 413–419.
[146] r. fraser, c. frisby, m. schirmer, l.a. blackshaw, j. langman, g.
howarth, e.k. yeoh, divergence of mucosal and motor effects of insulin-
like growth factor (igf)-i and lr3igf-i on rat isolated ileum following
abdominal irradiation, j. gastroenterol. hepatol. 15 (2000) 1132–1137.
[147] g.s. howarth, r. fraser, c.l. frisby, m.b. schirmer, e.k. yeoh, effects
of insulin-like growth factor-i administration on radiation enteritis in rats,
scand. j. gastroenterol. 32 (1997) 1118–1124.
[148] g.s. howarth, j.c. cool, a.j. bourne, f.j. ballard, l.c. read, insulin-
like growth factor-i (igf-i) stimulates regrowth of the damaged intestine
in rats, when administered following, but not concurrent with, metho-
trexate, growth factors 15 (1998) 279–292.
[149] b.d. cohen, d.a. baker, c. soderstrom, g. tkalcevic, a.m. rossi, p.e.
miller, m.w. tengowski, f. wang, a. gualberto, j.s. beebe, j.d. moyer,
combination therapy enhances the inhibition of tumor growth with the
fully human anti-type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor monoclonal
antibody cp-751,871, clin. cancer res. 11 (2005) 2063–2073.
20
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
[150] h.c. lai, t.j. liu, c.t. ting, p.m. sharma, p.h. wang, insulin-like
growth factor-1 prevents loss of electrochemical gradient in cardiac
muscle mitochondria via activation of pi 3 kinase/akt pathway, mol.
cell. endocrinol. 205 (2003) 99–106.
[151] m. akiyama, t. hideshima, t. hayashi, y.t. tai, c.s. mitsiades, n.
mitsiades, d. chauhan, p. richardson, n.c. munshi, k.c. anderson,
cytokines modulate telomerase activity in a human multiple myeloma
cell line, cancer res. 62 (2002) 3876–3882.
[152] t. stromberg, a. dimberg, a. hammarberg, k. carlson, a. osterborg, k.
nilsson, h. jernberg-wiklund, rapamycin sensitizes multiple myeloma
cells to apoptosis induced by dexamethasone, blood 103 (2004)
3138–3147.
[153] h. harada, j.s. andersen, m. mann, n. terada, s.j. korsmeyer, p70s6
kinase signals cell survival as well as growth, inactivating the pro-apoptotic
molecule bad, proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 98 (2001) 9666–9670.
[154] j.b. easton, r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton, irs-1: auditing the
effectiveness of mtor inhibitors, cancer cell 9 (2006) 153–155.
[155] h. hosoi, m.b. dilling, t. shikata, l.n. liu, l. shu, r.a. ashmun, g.s.
germain, r.t. abraham, p.j. houghton, rapamycin causes poorly
reversible inhibition of mtor and induces p53-independent apoptosis in
human rhabdomyosarcoma cells, cancer res. 59 (1999) 886–894.
[156] q. huang, r.t. dunn ii, s. jayadev, o. disorbo, f.d. pack, s.b. farr, r.e.
stoll, k.t. blanchard, assessment of cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity by
microarray technology, toxicol. sci. 63 (2001) 196–207.
[157] j.x. huang, m. feldmeier, y.b. shui, d.c. beebe, evaluation of
fibroblast growth factor signaling during lens fiber cell differentiation,
invest. ophthalmol. vis. sci. 44 (2003) 680–690.
[158] k.n. thimmaiah, j. easton, s. huang, k.a. veverka, g.s. germain, f.c.
harwood, p.j. houghton, insulin-like growth factor i-mediated protection
from rapamycin-induced apoptosis is independent of ras-erk1-erk2 and
phosphatidylinositol 3′-kinase-akt signaling pathways, cancer res. 63
(2003) 364–374.
[159] y. tan, h. ruan, m.r. demeter, m.j. comb, p90(rsk) blocks bad-
mediated cell death via a protein kinase c-dependent pathway, j. biol.
chem. 274 (1999) 34859–34867.
[160] a. bonni, a. brunet, a.e. west, s.r. datta, m.a. takasu, m.e.
greenberg, cell survival promoted by the ras-mapk signaling pathway
by transcription-dependent and -independent mechanisms, science 286
(1999) 1358–1362.
[161] y. tan, m.r. demeter, h. ruan, m.j. comb, bad ser-155 phosphor-
ylation regulates bad/bcl-xl interaction and cell survival, j. biol.
chem. 275 (2000) 25865–25869.
[162] m.t. fernandez-sanchez, a. garcia-rodriguez, r. diaz-trelles, a. novelli,
inhibition of protein phosphatases induces igf-1-blocked neurotrophin-
insensitive neuronal apoptosis, febs lett. 398 (1996) 106–112.
[163] k.d. krueger, w.j. hunter iii, m.g. delcore, d.k. agrawal, calphostin
c as a rapid and strong inducer of apoptosis in human coronary artery
smooth muscle cells, int. immunopharmacol. 3 (2003) 1751–1759.
[164] l. zhang, x.s. wan, j.j. donahue, j.h. ware, a.r. kennedy, effects of
the bowman–birk inhibitor on clonogenic survival and cisplatin- or
radiation-induced cytotoxicity in human breast, cervical, and head and
neck cancer cells, nutr. cancer 33 (1999) 165–173.
[165] m. du, q.w. shen, m.j. zhu, role of beta-adrenoceptor signaling and
amp-activated protein kinase in glycolysis of postmortem skeletal
muscle, j. agric. food chem. 53 (2005) 3235–3239.
[166] c. brantley-finley, c.s. lyle, l. du, m.e. goodwin, t. hall, d.
szwedo, g.p. kaushal, t.c. chambers, the jnk, erk and p53
pathways play distinct roles in apoptosis mediated by the antitumor
agents vinblastine, doxorubicin, and etoposide, biochem. pharmacol.
66 (2003) 459–469.
[167] c.l. mamay, a.m. mingo-sion, d.m. wolf, m.d. molina, c.l. van den
berg, an inhibitory function for jnk in the regulation of igf-i signaling
in breast cancer, oncogene 22 (2003) 602–614.
[168] y. shi, h. yan, p. frost, j. gera, a. lichtenstein, mammalian target of
rapamycin inhibitors activate the akt kinase in multiple myeloma cells
by up-regulating the insulin-like growth factor receptor/insulin receptor
substrate-1/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase cascade, mol. cancer ther. 4
(2005) 1533–1540.
[169] d. yin, n. tamaki, a.d. parent, j.h. zhang, insulin-like growth factor-i
decreased etoposide-induced apoptosis in glioma cells by increasing bcl-2
expression and decreasing cpp32 activity, neurol. res. 27 (2005) 27–35.
[170] g.w. krystal, g. sulanke, j. litz, inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3-
kinase-akt signaling blocks growth, promotes apoptosis, and enhances
sensitivity of small cell lung cancer cells to chemotherapy, mol. cancer
ther. 1 (2002) 913–922.
[171] k.h. limesand, k.a. barzen, d.o. quissell, s.m. anderson, synergistic
suppression of apoptosis in salivary acinar cells by igf1 and egf, cell
death differ. 10 (2003) 345–355.
[172] m. gullaud, r. delanoue, j. silber, a drosophila model to study the
functions of twist orthologs in apoptosis and proliferation, cell death
differ. 10 (2003) 641–651.
[173] j. dupont, a.m. fernandez, c.a. glackin, l. helman, d. leroith,
insulin-like growth factor 1 (igf-1)-induced twist expression is involved
in the anti-apoptotic effects of the igf-1 receptor, j. biol. chem. 276
(2001) 26699–26707.
[174] j. trojanek, t. ho, l. del valle, m. nowicki, j.y. wang, a. lassak, f.
peruzzi, k. khalili, t. skorski, k. reiss, role of the insulin-like growth factor
i/insulin receptor substrate 1 axis in rad51 trafficking and dna repair by
homologous recombination, mol. cell. biol. 23 (2003) 7510–7524.
[175] l. shahrabani-gargir, t.k. pandita, h. werner, ataxia-telangiectasia
mutated gene controls insulin-like growth factor
receptor gene
expression in a deoxyribonucleic acid damage response pathway via
mechanisms involving zinc-finger transcription factors sp1 and wt1,
endocrinology 145 (2004) 5679–5687.
[176] g. bompard, c. puech, c. prebois, f. vignon, g. freiss, protein-tyrosine
phosphatase ptpl1/fap-1 triggers apoptosis in human breast cancer
cells, j. biol. chem. 277 (2002) 47861–47869.
[177] d.a. buckley, a. cheng, p.a. kiely, m.l. tremblay, r. o'connor,
regulation of insulin-like growth factor type i (igf-i) receptor kinase
activity by protein tyrosine phosphatase 1b (ptp-1b) and enhanced igf-
i-mediated suppression of apoptosis and motility in ptp-1b-deficient
fibroblasts, mol. cell. biol. 22 (2002) 1998–2010.
[178] r.j. levitt, m. pollak, insulin-like growth factor-i antagonizes the
antiproliferative effects of cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors on bxpc-3
pancreatic cancer cells, cancer res. 62 (2002) 7372–7376.
[179] m. pold, k. krysan, a. pold, m. dohadwala, n. heuze-vourc'h, j.t.
mao, k.l. riedl, s. sharma, s.m. dubinett, cyclooxygenase-2
modulates the insulin-like growth factor axis in non-small-cell lung
cancer, cancer res. 64 (2004) 6549–6555.
[180] j. zhong, j. deng, j. phan, s. dlouhy, h. wu, w. yao, p. ye, a.j. d'ercole,
w.h. lee, insulin-like growth factor-i protects granule neurons from
apoptosis and improves ataxia in weaver mice, j. neurosci. res. 80 (2005)
481–490.
[181] s.r. d'mello, c. galli, t. ciotti, p. calissano, induction of apoptosis in
cerebellar granule neurons by low potassium: inhibition of death by
insulin-like growth factor i and camp, proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 90
(1993) 10989–10993.
[182] p.c. chin, n. majdzadeh, s.r. d'mello, inhibition of gsk3beta is a
common event in neuroprotection by different survival factors, brain res.
mol. brain res. 137 (2005) 193–201.
[183] c. galli, o. meucci, a. scorziello, t.m. werge, p. calissano, g.
schettini, apoptosis in cerebellar granule cells is blocked by high kcl,
forskolin, and igf-1 through distinct mechanisms of action:
the
involvement of intracellular calcium and rna synthesis, j. neurosci.
15 (1995) 1172–1179.
[184] h. dudek, s.r. datta, t.f. franke, m.j. birnbaum, r. yao, g.m. cooper, r.a.
segal, d.r. kaplan, m.e. greenberg, regulation of neuronal survival by the
serine-threonine protein kinase akt, science 275 (1997) 661–665.
[185] l.a. blair, j. marshall, igf-1 modulates n and l calcium channels in a pi
3-kinase-dependent manner, neuron 19 (1997) 421–429.
[186] l.a. blair, k.k. bence-hanulec, s. mehta, t. franke, d. kaplan, j. marshall,
akt-dependent potentiation of l channels by insulin-like growth factor-1 is
required for neuronal survival, j. neurosci. 19 (1999) 1940–1951.
[187] k.k. bence-hanulec, j. marshall, l.a. blair, potentiation of neuronal l
calcium channels by igf-1 requires phosphorylation of the alpha1
subunit on a specific tyrosine residue, neuron 27 (2000) 121–131.
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
21
[188] j. marshall, b.m. dolan, e.p. garcia, s. sathe, x. tang, z. mao, l.a.
blair, calcium channel and nmda receptor activities differentially
regulate nuclear c/ebpbeta levels to control neuronal survival, neuron
39 (2003) 625–639.
[189] b.d. butts, d.a. linseman, s.s. le, t.a. laessig, k.a. heidenreich,
insulin-like growth factor-i suppresses degradation of the pro-survival
transcription factor myocyte enhancer
factor 2d (mef2d) during
neuronal apoptosis, horm. metab. res. 35 (2003) 763–770.
[190] v.c. russo, k. kobayashi, s. najdovska, n.l. baker, g.a. werther,
neuronal protection from glucose deprivation via modulation of glucose
transport and inhibition of apoptosis: a role for the insulin-like growth
factor system, brain res. 1009 (2004) 40–53.
[191] e.a. bohula, m.p. playford, v.m. macaulay, targeting the type 1 insulin-
like growth factor receptor as anti-cancer treatment, anticancer drugs 14
(2003) 669–682.
[192] e. surmacz, growth factor receptors as therapeutic targets: strategies to
inhibit the insulin-like growth factor i receptor, oncogene 22 (2003)
6589–6597.
[193] f. hofmann, c. garcia-echeverria, blocking the insulin-like growth
factor-i receptor as a strategy for targeting cancer, drug discov. today 10
(2005) 1041–1047.
[194] y. wang, m. malkowski, j. hailey, t. turek-etienne, t. tripodi, j.a.
pachter, screening for small mol.ecule inhibitors of insulin-like growth
factor receptor (igf-1r) kinase: comparison of homogeneous time-
resolved fluorescence and 33p-atp plate assay formats, j. exp. ther.
oncol. 4 (2004) 111–119.
[195] g.s. warshamana-greene, j. litz, e. buchdunger, c. garcia-echeverria, f.
hofmann, g.w. krystal, the insulin-like growth factor-i receptor kinase
inhibitor, nvp-adw742, sensitizes small cell lung cancer cell lines to the
effects of chemotherapy, clin. cancer res. 11 (2005) 1563–1571.
[196] g.s. warshamana-greene, j. litz, e. buchdunger, f. hofmann, c.
garcia-echeverria, g.w. krystal, the insulin-like growth factor-i
(igf-i) receptor kinase inhibitor nvp-adw742, in combination with
sti571, delineates a spectrum of dependence of small cell
lung
cancer on igf-i and stem cell factor signaling, mol. cancer ther. 3
(2004) 527–535.
[197] y. wang, y. sun, insulin-like growth factor receptor-1 as an anti-cancer
target: blocking transformation and inducing apoptosis, curr. cancer
drug targets 2 (2002) 191–207.
[198] c.s. mitsiades, n.s. mitsiades, c.j. mcmullan, v. poulaki, r. shringarpure,
m. akiyama, t. hideshima, d. chauhan, m. joseph, t.a. libermann, c.
garcia-echeverria, m.a. pearson, f. hofmann, k.c. anderson, a.l. kung,
inhibition of the insulin-like growth factor receptor-1 tyrosine kinase
activity as a therapeutic strategy for multiple myeloma, other hematologic
malignancies, and solid tumors, cancer cell 5 (2004) 221–230.
[199] m. hopfner, v. baradari, a. huether, c. schofl, h. scherubl, the insulin-
like growth factor receptor 1 is a promising target for novel treatment
approaches in neuroendocrine gastrointestinal tumours, endocr. relat.
cancer 13 (2006) 135–149.
[200] m. hopfner, a. huether, a.p. sutter, v. baradari, d. schuppan, h.
scherubl, blockade of igf-1 receptor tyrosine kinase has antineoplastic
effects in hepatocellular carcinoma cells, biochem. pharmacol. 71 (2006)
1435–1448.
[201] w.h. gotlieb, i. bruchim, j. gu, y. shi, a. camirand, m.j. blouin, y.
zhao, m.n. pollak, insulin-like growth factor receptor i targeting in
epithelial ovarian cancer, gynecol. oncol. 100 (2006) 389–396.
[202] k. scotlandi, m.c. manara, g. nicoletti, p.l. lollini, s. lukas, s. benini,
s. croci, s. perdichizzi, d. zambelli, m. serra, c. garcia-echeverria, f.
hofmann, p. picci, antitumor activity of the insulin-like growth factor-i
receptor kinase inhibitor nvp-aew541 in musculoskeletal
tumors,
cancer res. 65 (2005) 3868–3876.
[203] c. garcia-echeverria, m.a. pearson, a. marti, t. meyer, j. mestan, j.
zimmermann, j. gao, j. brueggen, h.g. capraro, r. cozens, d.b. evans,
d. fabbro, p. furet, d.g. porta, j. liebetanz, g. martiny-baron, s. ruetz, f.
hofmann, in vivo antitumor activity of nvp-aew541—a novel, potent,
and selective inhibitor of the igf-ir kinase, cancer cell 5 (2004) 231–239.
[204] d. sachdev, s.l. li, j.s. hartell, y. fujita-yamaguchi, j.s. miller, d. yee, a
chimeric humanized single-chain antibody against the type i insulin-like
growth factor (igf) receptor renders breast cancer cells refractory to the
mitogenic effects of igf-i, cancer res. 63 (2003) 627–635.
[205] j. hailey, e. maxwell, k. koukouras, w.r. bishop, j.a. pachter, y.
wang, neutralizing anti-insulin-like growth factor receptor 1 antibodies
inhibit receptor function and induce receptor degradation in tumor cells,
mol. cancer ther. 1 (2002) 1349–1353.
[206] e.k. maloney, j.l. mclaughlin, n.e. dagdigian, l.m. garrett, k.m.
connors, x.m. zhou, w.a. blattler, t. chittenden, r. singh, an anti-
insulin-like growth factor i receptor antibody that is a potent inhibitor of
cancer cell proliferation, cancer res. 63 (2003) 5073–5083.
[207] j.d. wu, a. odman, l.m. higgins, k. haugk, r. vessella, d.l. ludwig,
s.r. plymate, in vivo effects of the human type i insulin-like growth
factor receptor antibody a12 on androgen-dependent and androgen-
independent xenograft human prostate tumors, clin. cancer res. 11
(2005) 3065–3074.
[208] l. goetsch, a. gonzalez, o. leger, a. beck, p.j. pauwels, j.f. haeuw, n.
corvaia, a recombinant humanized anti-insulin-like growth factor
receptor type i antibody (h7c10) enhances the antitumor activity of
vinorelbine and anti-epidermal growth factor receptor therapy against
human cancer xenografts, int. j. cancer 113 (2005) 316–328.
[209] m. goya, s. miyamoto, k. nagai, y. ohki, k. nakamura, k. shitara, h.
maeda, t. sangai, k. kodama, y. endoh, g. ishii, t. hasebe, h. yonou,
t. hatano, y. ogawa, a. ochiai, growth inhibition of human prostate
cancer cells in human adult bone implanted into nonobese diabetic/severe
combined immunodeficient mice by a ligand-specific antibody to human
insulin-like growth factors, cancer res. 64 (2004) 6252–6258.
[210] p.g. jackson-booth, c. terry, b. lackey, m. lopaczynska, p. nissley,
inhibition of the biologic response to insulin-like growth factor i in mcf-
7 breast cancer cells by a new monoclonal antibody to the insulin-like
growth factor-i receptor. the importance of receptor down-regulation,
horm. metab. res. 35 (2003) 850–856.
[211] d. burtrum, z. zhu, d. lu, d.m. anderson, m. prewett, d.s. pereira, r.
bassi, r. abdullah, a.t. hooper, h. koo, x. jimenez, d. johnson, r.
apblett, p. kussie, p. bohlen, l. witte, d.j. hicklin, d.l. ludwig, a fully
human monoclonal antibody to the insulin-like growth factor i receptor
blocks ligand-dependent signaling and inhibits human tumor growth in
vivo, cancer res. 63 (2003) 8912–8921.
[212] p. dent, s.i. han, c. mitchell, e. studer, a. yacoub, j. grandis, s. grant,
g.w. krystal, p.b. hylemon, inhibition of
insulin/igf-1 receptor
signaling enhances bile acid toxicity in primary hepatocytes, biochem.
pharmacol. 70 (2005) 1685–1696.
[213] p.j. houghton, g.s. germain, f.c. harwood, j.d. schuetz, c.f. stewart,
e. buchdunger, p. traxler, imatinib mesylate is a potent inhibitor of the
abcg2 (bcrp) transporter and reverses resistance to topotecan and sn-
38 in vitro, cancer res. 64 (2004) 2333–2337.
[214] c. erlichman, s.a. boerner, c.g. hallgren, r. spieker, x.y. wang, c.d.
james, g.l. scheffer, m. maliepaard, d.d. ross, k.c. bible, s.h.
kaufmann, the her tyrosine kinase inhibitor ci1033 enhances
cytotoxicity of 7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin and topotecan by
inhibiting breast cancer resistance protein-mediated drug efflux, cancer
res. 61 (2001) 739–748.
[215] c.f. stewart, m. leggas, j.d. schuetz, j.c. panetta, p.j. cheshire, j.
peterson, n. daw, j.j. jenkins iii, r. gilbertson, g.s. germain, f.c.
harwood, p.j. houghton, gefitinib enhances the antitumor activity and oral
bioavailability of irinotecan in mice, cancer res. 64 (2004) 7491–7499.
[216] m. leggas, j.c. panetta, y. zhuang, j.d. schuetz, b. johnston, f. bai, b.
sorrentino, s. zhou, p.j. houghton, c.f. stewart, gefitinib modulates the
function of multiple atp-binding cassette transporters in vivo, cancer
res. 66 (2006) 4802–4807.
[217] j.j. ye, s.j. liang, n. guo, s.l. li, a.m. wu, s. giannini, d. sachdev, d.
yee, n. brunner, d. ikle, y. fujita-yamaguchi, combined effects of
tamoxifen and a chimeric humanized single chain antibody against the
type i igf receptor on breast tumor growth in vivo, horm. metab. res. 35
(2003) 836–842.
[218] y. lu, x. zi, y. zhao, d. mascarenhas, m. pollak, insulin-like growth
factor-i receptor signaling and resistance to trastuzumab (herceptin),
j. natl. cancer inst. 93 (2001) 1852–1857.
[219] y. lu, x. zi, m. pollak, molecular mechanisms underlying igf-i-induced
22
r.t. kurmasheva, p.j. houghton / biochimica et biophysica acta 1766 (2006) 1–22
attenuation of the growth-inhibitory activity of trastuzumab (herceptin) on
skbr3 breast cancer cells, int. j. cancer 108 (2004) 334–341.
[220] a. camirand, y. lu, m. pollak, co-targeting her2/erbb2 and insulin-
like growth factor-1 receptors causes synergistic inhibition of growth in
her2-overexpressing breast cancer cells, med. sci. monit. 8 (2002)
br521–br526.
[221] r. nahta, l.x. yuan, b. zhang, r. kobayashi, f.j. esteva, insulin-like
growth factor-i receptor/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
heterodimerization contributes to trastuzumab resistance of breast cancer
cells, cancer res. 65 (2005) 11118–11128.
[222] d. lu, h. zhang, d. ludwig, a. persaud, x. jimenez, d. burtrum, p.
balderes, m. liu, p. bohlen, l. witte, z. zhu, simultaneous blockade
of both the epidermal growth factor receptor and the insulin-like
growth factor receptor signaling pathways in cancer cells with a fully
human recombinant bispecific antibody, j. biol. chem. 279 (2004)
2856–2865.
[223] y. feng, z. zhu, x. xiao, v. choudhry, j.c. barrett, d.s. dimitrov, novel
human monoclonal antibodies to insulin-like growth factor (igf)-ii that
potently inhibit the igf receptor type i signal transduction function, mol.
cancer ther. 5 (2006) 114–120.