biochemical and biophysical research communications 353 (2007) 60–66
www.elsevier.com/locate/ybbrc
in vitro transformation of mesenchymal stem cells by oncogenic h-rasval12
yasuko shima a,b, takeshi okamoto a,b, tomoki aoyama a, ko yasura a, tatsuya ishibe a,b,
koichi nishijo a,b, kotaro r. shibata a,b, yoshiki kohno a,b, kenichi fukiage a,
seiji otsuka a,c, daisuke uejima a,d, tomitaka nakayama b, takashi nakamura b,
tohru kiyono e, junya toguchida a,*
a institute for frontier medical sciences, kyoto university, 53 kawahara-cho, shogoin, sakyo-ku, kyoto 606-8507, japan
b department of orthopaedic surgery, graduate school of medicine, kyoto university, kyoto, japan
c department of musculoskeletal medicine, graduate school of medical sciences, nagoya city university, nagoya, japan
d department of orthopaedic surgery, kansai medical university, moriguchi, japan
e virology division, national cancer center research institute, tokyo, japan
received 17 november 2006
available online 6 december 2006
abstract
tissue stem cells may serve as progenitors for malignant tumors derived from the same tissue. here, we report the establishment of
immortalized human mesenchymal stem cells (ihmsc) and tested the feasibility of using ihmsc as presarcomatous cells. immortaliza-
tion was achieved by introducing the genes for human telomerase reverse transcriptase and bmi1. ihmsc retained the potential for multi-
directional diﬀerentiation of the original msc. to transform ihmsc, we introduced an oncogenic h-rasval12 gene, and established the
cell line ihmsc-ras. ihmsc-ras had the phenotype of fully transformed cells and retained adipogenic and chondrogenic, but not oste-
ogenic, potential. interestingly, ihmsc-ras demonstrated morphological features of autophagy, and inhibition of the erk pathway sup-
pressed the production of autophagosomes, indicating that ras/erk signaling is responsible for the induction of autophagy. thus
ihmsc will serve as a material with which to analyze the tumorigenic and diﬀerentiation-modifying eﬀects of candidate oncogenes
involved in the development of sarcomas.
ó 2006 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.
keywords: mesenchymal stem cell; tert; bmi1; ras; transformation; autophagy; diﬀerentiation
sarcomas are deﬁned as malignant
tumors derived
from non-epithelial tissues, but the precursors of sarcoma
cells are equivocal in most cases. for example, osteosar-
comas, the most common malignant bone tumor, are
deﬁned as tumors producing immature bone tissue called
osteoid. this deﬁnition, however, does not mean that the
precursors of osteosarcomas are cells committed to the
osteoblastic lineage. one major histological subtype of
osteosarcoma is
in
which cartilaginous tissues are formed directly by tumor
the chondroblastic osteosarcoma,
* corresponding author. fax: +81 75 751 4144.
e-mail address: togjun@frontier.kyoto-u.ac.jp (j. toguchida).
0006-291x/$ - see front matter ó 2006 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.11.137
cells expressing a number of cartilage-related genes [1],
suggesting that cells of this type of osteosarcoma have
the potential to diﬀerentiate in at least two directions.
most osteosarcomas develop from bone marrow, and
therefore bone marrow stromal cells are reasonable can-
didates for the precursors of osteosarcomas, and the
most plausible candidate cells are mesenchymal stem cells
(mscs). mscs are deﬁned as cells with the potential to
diﬀerentiate into a variety of mesenchymal cell lineages
[2], and therefore have the potential to be the precursor
of a variety of mesenchymal tumors, although there have
been no reports showing the development of a particular
type of sarcoma from msc. considering that transfor-
mation requires the immortalization step,
immortalized
y. shima et al. / biochemical and biophysical research communications 353 (2007) 60–66
61
human msc as presarcomatous cells would be a suitable
material with which to test the oncogenic potential of
candidate genes.
in this study, we tried to immortalize hmsc by inacti-
vating the p16ink4a gene using the bmi1 gene. bmi1 was
ﬁrst identiﬁed as an oncogene that cooperates with c-myc
in the generation of mouse lymphomas [3]. bmi1 is a nucle-
ar protein which makes a complex with other polycomb
group proteins and binds to polycomb response elements
to inhibit the transcription of target genes including the
p16ink4a gene [4]. a recent report stated that bmi1 is
required for the self-renewal of stem cells in the peripheral
and central nervous systems [5]. the bmi1 gene is also
thought to regulate the replicative life span of human ﬁbro-
blasts [6] and recent reports described the immortalization
of human ovarian surface epithelial cells [7] and mesenchy-
mal stem cells [8].
here, we
established immortalized human msc
(ihmsc), which retained the potential for multi-directional
diﬀerentiation of the original cells, and tested the feasibility
of using ihmsc as presarcomatous cells.
materials and methods
cell culture and reagents. adult hmsc were purchased from bio
whittaker, and cultured in msc growing medium (bio whittaker). ej
and saos2 were obtained from american type culture collection, and
ampho293 was obtained from clontech and cultured in dulbecco’s
modiﬁed eagle’s medium (dmem, sigma–aldrich) with 10% fetal bovine
serum (fbs, hyclone).
antibodies against phospho-p44/42 mapk (p-erk1/2), pan-erk,
phospho-p38 (p-p38), pan-p38, and p16ink4a were purchased from bd
biosciences. the antibody against human lc3 [9] was kindly provided by
dr. mizushima (national institute for basic biology, japan). the mek
inhibitor u0126 was obtained from promega.
reverse transcription (rt)-pcr. total rna was extracted from cells
and pellets using an rnase easy mini kit (qiagen), and reverse-tran-
scribed with the superscript iii ﬁrst strand system (invitrogen). the
synthesized cdna was used as a template for each pcr, and the products
were electrophoresed on 1.5–2% agarose gels and visualized by ethidium
bromide staining. information on the primer pairs used in the rt-pcr is
available upon request.
retroviral vectors and infections. retroviral vectors expressing htert
and the bmi1 gene were previously described [10]. a retroviral vector
expressing oncogenic h-rasval12 was constructed using rna derived from
the bladder carcinoma cell line ej, which contained an oncogenic h-rasval12
gene [11]. after the reverse transcription, the entire coding region of the h-
rasval12 gene was ampliﬁed and ﬁrst cloned into a ta vector (invitrogen),
plasmids containing the correct sequence were selected, and the subcloned
into a retroviral vector pqcxip-ires-puro (clontech).
amphotropic retroviruses were produced by transfection of
the
ampho293 producer cell lines with each retroviral vector using lipofect-
amine 2000 (invitrogen). cells were infected with amphotropic retrovi-
ruses in 6 lg/ml of polybrane, and puriﬁed by selection with 100 lg/ml of
hygromycin b (sigma–aldrich) or 100 lg/ml of g418 (sigma–aldrich).
western blotting. sds-sample buﬀer was added directly to the dishes,
and cells were stripped with a cell scraper, and the cell lysate was then
sonicated. total protein (20 lg) was electrophoresed on sds polyacryl-
amide gels and transferred to immobilon-p membranes (millipore). the
membranes were blocked using a 5% dried milk powder, and incubated
with the antibody against each protein. they were then washed and
incubated with horseradish peroxidase (hrp)-conjugated goat anti-mouse
igg (santa cruz biotechnology) and hrp-conjugated swine anti rabbit
igg (dako) and detected using enhanced chemiluminescence plus
reagents (amersham pharmacia biotech).
northern blot analysis. total rna was isolated from cells using sep-
asol reagent (nacalai tesque). ten micrograms of total rna was sepa-
rated on a 1% agarose–formaldehyde gel, and blotted on to a nylon
membrane, and hybridized with 32p-labeled probes. a part of the cdna
of the human h-ras gene (nm005343) was ampliﬁed by rt-pcr and
used as a probe.
telomere length and telomerase assay. telomere length was measured
as described previously [12]. the telomerase activity in cells was detected
with the telomeric repeat ampliﬁcation protocol (trap) as described
previously [12] using a telo chaser kit (toyobo).
transmission electron microscopy. cells were ﬁxed with ice-cold 2%
glutaraldehyde in 0.1 m cacodylate buﬀer (ph 7.0), and thin sections
(70–80 nm) were prepared and stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate
and observed using a transmission electron microscope.
g-banding karyotypic analysis. metaphase spreads were prepared from
cells treated with colcemid, and 50 metaphases were analyzed by the
standard g-banding method.
phenotype analyses
proliferation assay. cells (1 · 104) were seeded in 60-mm culture dishes
in triplicate, and cultured in dmem with 1% or 10% fbs. the number of
cells in each dish was counted by hemocytometer at each time point.
soft agar assay. cells (1 · 104) were suspended in 0.35% low-melting
point agarose dissolved in dmem with 10% fbs, and seeded in 60-mm
culture dishes precoated with 0.7% agarose. after 2 weeks, colonies in
three random ﬁelds of view at 200· magniﬁcation were scored. experi-
ments were performed in triplicate.
matrigel invasion assay. cell suspensions (2.5 · 104/0.5 ml dmem)
were added into the upper wells of 24-well chambers (bd biosciences).
after incubation for 22 h, invading cells were ﬁxed with 100% methanol
and stained with 1% toluidine blue. cells in ﬁve random ﬁelds of view at
200· magniﬁcation were counted and expressed as the average number of
cells per ﬁeld of view. data were expressed as the percent invasion through
the matrigel membrane relative to the migration through the control
membrane.
in vivo tumor formation. cell suspensions containing 5 · 106 cells in
100 ll of pbs were injected subcutaneously into immunodeﬁcient mice
(balb/c nu/nu). three mice were used for each cell type. tumor volume
was calculated with the formula 4/3p r3.
diﬀerentiation assay. adipogenic, osteogenic, and chondrogenic dif-
ferentiation were performed as previously described [12], and oil-red-o
staining, alizarin red staining, and alcian blue staining were used to
evaluate the diﬀerentiation as previously described [12].
results
establishment of bmi1-htert-immortalized hmsc
after the sequential introduction of the htert and
bmi1 genes into hmsc, drug-resistant cells were selected
and propagated. this polyclonal cell
line, designated
hmsc-bmi1-ht, grew much faster than the original hmsc
with a doubling time of 48 h, and showed no signs of enter-
ing senescence after more than 24 months. the telomerase
activity of hmsc-bmi1-ht was comparable with that of
hela (fig. 1a), and the telomere length was maintained
even in late passaged cells (fig. 1b). expression of the
exogenous bmi1 gene was conﬁrmed by northern blotting
(fig. 1c), and the expression of the p16ink4a gene was
markedly downregulated at both the mrna and protein
level (fig. 1d). this immortalized line may consist of cells
62
y. shima et al. / biochemical and biophysical research communications 353 (2007) 60–66
fig. 1. establishment of immortalized hmsc. (a) telomerase activity of immortalized hmsc (hmsc-bmi1-ht). (b) telomere length of hmsc-bmi1-ht
in early and late passaged cells. (c) expression of the exogenous bmi1 gene. closed and open arrows indicate the exogenous and endogenous bmi1 gene,
respectively. (d) downregulation of p16ink4a expression at the mrna and protein level in hmsc-bmi-ht. (e) potential of ihmsc to diﬀerentiate.
oil-red-o, alizarin red, and alcian blue staining were performed after adipogenic, osteogenic, and chondrogenic induction, respectively.
diﬀering in the potential to diﬀerentiate, as we previously
found in a study of hmsc immortalized by the hpve6/
e7 genes [12]. single cell cloning by the limited dilution
method using 96-well culture plates was performed, and a
total of 100 clones were isolated, and the potential of each
clone to diﬀerentiate was analyzed. five clones showed adi-
pogenic, osteogenic, and chondrogenic diﬀerentiation
potential, one of which was randomly selected for further
study. the diﬀerentiation potential of this clone, hereafter
called ihmsc, was stable even 24 months after cloning
(fig. 1e).
in vitro transformation of ihmsc by oncogenic h-rasval12
to test the potential of ihmsc to serve as cells for the
screening of candidate oncogenes, the h-rasval12 gene was
introduced by a retroviral vector. the transduction of ret-
roviral vectors expressing the oncogenic h-rasval12 gene
into ihmsc was independently performed in two experi-
ments. drug selection was started 48 h after the transduc-
tion, and cells were cultured and propagated until they
grew stably. polyclonal cell lines for each experiment were
established, and designated ihmsc-ras-1 and ihmsc-ras-
2. as a control, mock-transfected cells were also estab-
lished (ihmsc-mock-1 and ihmsc-mock-2). expression
of the exogenous h-rasval12 gene was conﬁrmed by north-
ern blotting (supplementary fig. 1). the karyotypic analy-
sis of ihmsc-ras-1 showed that the dominant mode (39/50
metaphase) was (46, xy) with a marker chromosome (sup-
plementary fig. 2). the doubling-time of the ihmsc-ras
under standard (10% fbs) and serum-starved (1% fbs)
conditions was 18.3 and 30.0 h, respectively, shorter than
that of ihmsc (26.2 and 38.6 h). the anchorage-indepen-
dent growth potential of ihmsc-ras was conﬁrmed by per-
forming a colony formation assay in soft agar (fig. 2a).
the motility of ihmsc-ras was signiﬁcantly increased com-
pared to that of ihmsc and ihmsc-mock (fig. 2b).
although the number of cells capable of invading the
matrix was small, there was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between
ihmsc-ras and ihmsc-mock (fig. 2c). the innoculation
of ihmsc-ras into subcutaneous tissue in nude mice pro-
duced rapidly growing tumors with a frequency of 100%
(fig. 2d), the histological diagnosis being undiﬀerentiated
spindle cell tumors with no particular features (fig. 2e).
these results
the
h-rasval12 gene was able to completely transform ihmsc
into undiﬀerentiated sarcoma cells.
the introduction of
indicated that
induction of autophagy by oncogenic h-rasval12
there was a clear morphological diﬀerence val12
between the ihmsc and ihmsc-ras lines. both ihmsc-
ras-1 (fig. 3a, b) and ras-2 (data not shown) had an abun-
dance of cytosolic vacuoli, which were not found in ihmsc
(fig. 3a, a), ihmsc-mock-1 or -2 (data not shown).
transmission electron microscopic analysis revealed
these vacuoli to be secondary lysosomes containing residu-
al bodies (fig. 3b), a feature of autophagy [13]. lc3
(microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3) is a human
homologue of atg8, which is a key molecule in the
y. shima et al. / biochemical and biophysical research communications 353 (2007) 60â€“66
63
fig. 2. oncogenic property of ihmsc-ras. (a) anchorage-independent growth. (b) cell motility assay. (c) cell invasion assay. samples in each lane were:
lane 1, ihmsc; lane 2, ihmsc-mock-1; lane 3, ihmsc-mock-2; lane 4, ihmsc-ras-1; and lane 5, ihmsc-ras-2. (d) growth curve of in vivo tumors. closed
circles, ihmsc-ras-1 (three mice); open circles, ihmsc-ras-2 (two mice). (e) histology of in vivo tumors produced by ihmsc-ras-1.
fig. 3. induction of autophagy by oncogenic h-rasval12 in ihmsc. (a) phase contrast micrographs of ihmsc (a), and ihmsc-ras-1 (b). (b) transmission
electron micrographs of ihmsc-ras-1. arrows and arrowheads indicated secondary lysomes and residual bodies, respectively. (c) western blot for lc3.
cell lysate was prepared from each cell line. (d) expression of erk1/2 in ihmsc lines. (e) phase-contrast micrographs of ihmsc-ras-1 with or without
treatment with u0126.
autophagosomes
development of
[14]. a
c-terminal fragment of lc3 is cleaved immediately after
synthesis, producing a cytosolic form known as lc3-i,
and a subpopulation of lc3-i is further converted to an
in yeast
autophagosome-associating form, lc3-ii [14]. western
blot analysis using the antibody against lc3 clearly
showed the
in ihmsc-ras-1
(fig. 3c), and ihmsc-ras-2 (data not shown).
induction of lc3-ii
64
y. shima et al. / biochemical and biophysical research communications 353 (2007) 60–66
the mitogen-activated protein kinase (mapk) pathway
is the major pathway transferring the ras signal, in which
three diﬀerent routes are known; the erk, p38, and c-
jun n-terminal kinase (jnk) pathways [15]. the activity
of these map kinases was examined under standard or
low serum conditions (fig. 3d). the amount of phosphor-
ylated erk (perk) was much greater in ihmsc-ras than
in ihmsc under both standard and serum-free conditions
(fig. 3d). the amount of phosphorylated p38 (pp38)
showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between ihmsc and
ihmsc-ras (supplementary fig. 3), and hardly any phos-
phorylated jnk was observed in any cell line (data not
shown). therefore, the expression of the oncogenic ras
gene in ihmsc induced the phosphorylation of erk in a
serum-independent manner. u0126, a speciﬁc inhibitor
for mek, a kinase of erk, was used to inhibit the erk
activity in the hmsc-ras lines. all three cell lines showed
a reduction in the expression of perk after the treatment
with u0126 (supplementary fig. 4). the morphology of
ihmsc and ihmsc-ras was compared before and after
the treatment. ihmsc showed no remarkable morphologi-
cal change after the treatment with u0126 (data not
shown), whereas the number of ihmsc-ras cells with auto-
phagosomes was signiﬁcantly reduced (fig. 3e) these
results indicated the induction of autophagy by oncogenic
h-rasval12.
diﬀerentiation potential of ihmsc-ras
adipogenic diﬀerentiation
after the induction, ihmsc-ras-1 showed oil-red-o-
positive droplets (fig. 4a, a) as did ihmsc (fig. 1e, a).
the adipogenic
induction, whereas
in the case of ihmsc, the expression the pparc gene
was silent in the non-induced state, and became positive
after
ihmsc-ras
expressed the pparc gene without the induction in associ-
ation with the ap2 gene, which was one of the genes down-
stream of the pparc gene (fig. 4b). in contrast, the
expression of
induced in
ihmsc-ras (fig. 4b).
the adipsin gene was not
osteogenic diﬀerentiation
the osteogenic diﬀerentiation of ihmsc-ras-1 was sig-
niﬁcantly inhibited.
ihmsc ras-1 formed almost no
alizarin-red-positive calciﬁed nodules (fig. 4a, b), which
were abundantly observed in ihmsc (fig. 1e, b). as for
the mrna expression, the most striking diﬀerence between
ihmsc-mock-1 and ihmsc-ras-1 was in the gene expres-
sion of osteocalcin (oc) and its regulator, osf2/runx2
(fig. 4b). under standard culture conditions,
ihmsc-
mock-1 expressed the osf2/runx2 gene weakly, which
was evoked by the osteogenic induction (fig. 4b). no
expression of
the osf2/runx2 gene, however, was
observed in ihmsc-ras-1 and the expression of the oc
gene also remained suppressed (fig. 4b).
chondrogenic diﬀerentiation
after 3 weeks of chondrogenic induction, the ihmsc-
ras-1 produced a solid pellet in the three-dimensional cul-
ture, which contained matrices positive for alcian blue
staining (fig. 4a, c). the gene expression of cartilage olig-
omeric matrix protein (comp), aggrecan (agc), and to a
lesser extent, a1 chain of type 2 collagen (col2a1) was
upregulated in hmsc-ras (fig. 4b). these results suggested
fig. 4. potential of ihmsc-ras to diﬀerentiate. (a) lineage-related histochemical staining after the induction of each lineage. (b) mrna expression of
lineage-related genes after the induction of each lineage in ihmsc-mock and ihmsc-ras. (c) mrna expression of adipogenic and osteogenic lineage-
related genes in ihmsc-mock and ihmsc-ras with or without treatment with u0126.
y. shima et al. / biochemical and biophysical research communications 353 (2007) 60–66
65
that the oncogenic h-rasval12 protein had no signiﬁcant
eﬀect on the chondrogenic diﬀerentiation.
the mrna expression of adipo- and osteo-related
genes in cells treated with u0126 was analyzed by rt-
pcr (fig. 4c). the expression of the pparc and ap2
genes in ihmsc-ras was reduced when the cells were treat-
ed with u0126 (fig. 4c), whereas no restoration of the
expression of
the osf2/runx2 and oc genes was
observed (fig. 4c). these results suggested that the accel-
eration of adipogenic diﬀerentiation was mediated through
the erk pathway, but the loss of osteogenic potential was
caused by other pathways. identical results were obtained
in ihmsc-ras-2 (data not shown), suggesting the constant
eﬀect of h-rasval12 for the diﬀerentiation potential of
ihmsc.
discussion
as far as we know, this is the ﬁrst report of the transfor-
mation of hmsc in vitro. the result was compatible with a
previous spontaneous transformation of htert-intro-
duced hmsc, in which p16ink4a was inactivated by a dele-
tion and the k-ras gene was mutated [16].
the transformation of ihmsc by the h-rasval12 gene
revealed two interesting ﬁndings. first,
the oncogenic
h-rasval12 induced, to our surprise, autophagy in ihmsc.
autophagy is a critical process responsible for the degrada-
tion of intracellular material by a membrane of uncertain
origin to form an autophagosome that sequesters such
material and subsequently fuses with the lysosome [13],
and involved in physiological processes as well as patholog-
ical conditions such as neurodegenerative disease, cardio-
myopathies, and cancer
[17]. because autophagy is
suppressed in most cancer cells, autophagy-related genes
may work as tumor suppressors [18]. in some types of can-
cer cells, however, autophagy was activated as a defense
mechanism to protect against poor nutrition in tumor tis-
sues [18]. therefore, it is not clear whether the autophagy
observed in ihmsc-ras reﬂected the process of transforma-
tion or not. however, because this feature was constantly
observed in two independently established cell
it
might be used as a morphological feature to detect poten-
tially transformed cells in vitro. the relationship between
the ras signal and autophagy is controversial. raf-1 is an
eﬀector for mapk signaling pathways, which constitute
three routes; erk, p38, and jnk [19]. activation of raf-
1 induced autophagy in colon cancer ht-29 cells through
the activation of erk [19], indicating that the ras signal
stimulates autophagy. on the other hand, the introduction
of the h-rasval12 gene into nih3t3 reduced the autophagy
stimulated by nutrient starvation through the activation of
class i pi3-k [20]. thus the pi3-k pathway and mapk
pathway exert opposite eﬀects on autophagy, and the eﬀect
of the activation of ras may depend on cell speciﬁcity. we
have shown that the introduction of h-rasval12 into ihmsc
induced autophagy through the activation of the erk
pathway without growth inhibition.
lines,
second, the h-rasval12-mediated transformation com-
pletely abolished the osteogenic potential of
ihmsc.
osf2, an osteoblast-speciﬁc form of the runx2 tran-
scription factor, is shown to play a central role in deter-
mining osteogenic and adipogenic diﬀerentiation. osf2/
runx2 /  chondrocytes diﬀerentiate
spontaneously
in vitro into adipogenic cells expressing the pparc gene,
and introduction of the osf2/runx2 gene inhibited
the expression of the pparc gene [21]. on the other
hand, pparc activated by its
ligand inhibited the
dna-binding activity of osf2/runx2, and therefore
the gene expression of its targets such as oc [22]. in this
report, activated ras
the
pparc gene and accelerated the adipogenic diﬀerentia-
tion, which mimicked the eﬀect of knocking out osf2/
runx2. however, inhibition of the erk pathway by
u0126 inhibited the expression of pparc without restor-
ing the expression of the osf2/runx2 gene, suggesting
that the induction of pparc expression by h-rasval12
was independent of the inactivation of osf2/runx2.
because activated mutations of ras genes are rarely
found in osteosarcomas [23], there must be molecules ful-
ﬁlling the role of the ras signal
in osteosarcomas. the
ihmsc described here can serve as a material to investi-
gate the oncogenic properties and eﬀects on diﬀerentia-
tion of candidate molecules.
induced the expression of
acknowledgments
this work was supported by grants-in-aid for scientiﬁc
research from the japan society for the promotion of sci-
ence, and from the new energy and industrial technology
development organization. the authors thank dr. noboru
mizushima for allowing them to use the anti-lc3 antibody,
drs. soichi adachi, and motonobu watanabe for helpful
advice.
appendix a. supplementary data
supplementary data associated with this article can be
in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.
found,
2006.11.137.
references
[1] t. aoyama, t. okamoto, s. nagayama, k. nishijo, t. ishibe, k.
yasura, t. nakayama, t. nakamura, j. toguchida, methylation in
the core-promoter region of the chondromodulin-i gene determines
the cell-speciﬁc expression by regulating the binding of transcriptional
activator sp3, j. biol. chem. 279 (2004) 28789–28797.
[2] m.f. pittenger, a.m. mackay, s.c. beck, r.k. jaiswal, r. douglas,
j.d. mosca, m.a. moorman, d.w. simonetti, s. craig, d.r.
marshak, multilineage potential of adult human mesenchymal stem
cells, science 284 (1999) 143–147.
[3] m. van lohuizen, s. verbeek, b. scheljen, e. wientjens, h. van der
guiden, a. berns, identiﬁcation of cooperating oncogenes in el-myc
transgenic mice by provirus tagging, cell 65 (1991) 737–752.
[4] j.j. jacobs, b. scheijen, j.w. voncken, k. kieboom, a. berns, m.
van lohuizen, bmi-1 collaborates with c-myc in tumorigenesis by
66
y. shima et al. / biochemical and biophysical research communications 353 (2007) 60–66
inhibiting c-myc-induced apoptosis via ink4a/arf, genes dev. 13
(1999) 2678–2690.
[13] w.a. dunn jr., autophagy and related mechanisms of lysosome-
mediated protein degradation, trends cell. biol. 4 (1994) 139–143.
[5] a.v. molofsky, r. pardal, t. iwashita, i.k. park, m.f. clarke, s.j.
morrison, bmi-1 dependence distinguishes neural stem cell self-
renewal from progenitor proliferation, nature 425 (2003) 962–967.
[6] k. itahana, y. zou, y. itahana, j.l. martinez, c. beausejour, j.j.
jacobs, m. van lohuizen, v. band, j. campisi, g.p. dimri, control
of the replicative life span of human ﬁbroblasts by p16 and the
polycomb protein bmi-1, mol. cell. biol. 23 (2003) 389–401.
[7] t. maeda, h. tashiro, m. begum, h. ohtake, t. kiyono, h.
okamura, establishment of an immortalized human ovarian surface
epithelial cell line without chromosomal instability, br. j. cancer. 93
(2005) 116–123.
[8] y. takeda, t. mori, h. imabayashi, t. kiyono, s. gojo, s. miyoshi,
n. hida, m. ita, k. segawa, s. ogawa, m. sakamoto, s. nakamura,
a. umezawa, can the life span of human marrow stromal cells be
prolonged by bmi-1, e6, e7, and/or telomerase without aﬀecting
cardiomyogenic diﬀerentiation? j. gene. med. 6 (2004) 833–845.
[9] y. kabeya, n. mizushima, t. ueno, a. yamamoto, t. kirisako, t.
noda, e. kominami, y. ohsumi, t. yoshimori, lc3, a mammalian
homologue of yeast apg8p, is localized in autophagosome mem-
branes after processing, embo j. 19 (2000) 5720–5728.
[10] t. kiyono, s.a. foster, j.i. koop, j.k. mcdougall, d.a. galloway,
a.j. klingelhutz, both rb/p16ink4a inactivation and telomerase
activity are required to immortalize human epithelial cells, nature 396
(1998) 84–88.
[11] l.f. parada, c.j. tabin, c. shih, r.a. weinberg, human ej bladder
carcinoma oncogene is homologue of harvey sarcoma virus ras gene,
nature 297 (1982) 474–478.
[12] t. okamoto, t. aoyama, t. nakayama, t. nakamata, t. hosaka,
k. nishijo, t. nakamura, t. kiyono, j. toguchida, clonal hetero-
geneity in diﬀerentiation potential of immortalized human mesenchy-
mal stem cells, biochem. biophys. res. commun. 295 (2002) 354–361.
[14] i. tanida, t. ueno, e. kominami, lc3 conjugation system in
mammalian autophagy, int. j. biochem. cell. biol. 36 (2004)
2503–2518.
[15] t. tanoue, e. nishida, molecular recognitions in the map kinase
cascades, cell. signal. 15 (2003) 455–462.
[16] n. serakinci, p. guldberg, j.s. burns, b. abdallah, h. schrodder, t.
jensen, m. kassem, adult human mesenchymal stem cell as a target
for neoplastic transformation, oncogene 23 (2004) 5095–5098.
[17] t. shintani, d.j. klionsky, autophagy in health and disease: a
double-edged sword, science 306 (2004) 990–995.
[18] e. ogier-denis, p. codogno, autophagy: a barrier or an adaptive
response to cancer, biochim. biophys. acta 1603 (2003) 113–128.
[19] s. pattingre, c. bauvy, p. codogno, amino acids interfere with the
erk1/2-dependent control of macroautophagy by controlling the
activation of raf-1 in human colon cancer ht-29 cells, j. biol. chem.
278 (2003) 16667–16674.
[20] s. furuta, e. hidaka, a. ogata, s. yokota, t. murata, ras is
involved in the negative control of autophagy through the class i pi3-
kinase, oncogene 23 (2004) 3898–3904.
[21] h. enomoto, t. furuichi, a. zanma, k. yamana, c. yoshida, s.
sumitani, h. yamamoto, m. enomoto-iwamoto, m. iwamoto, t.
komori, runx2 deﬁciency in chondrocytes causes adipogenic changes
in vitro, j. cell. sci. 117 (2004) 417–425.
[22] b. lecka-czernik, i. gubrij, e.j. moerman, o. kajkenova, d.a.
lipschitz, s.c. manolagas, r.l. jilka, inhibition of osf2/cbfa1
expression and terminal osteoblast diﬀerentiation by pparc2, j. cell.
biochem. 74 (1999) 357–371.
[23] f. antillo´ n-klu¨ssmann, m. garcı´a-delgado, i. villa-elı´zag, l.
sierrasesu´maga, mutational activation of ras genes is absent in
pediatric osteosarcoma, cancer genet. cytgenet.
(1995)
49–53.
79