cell metabolism
previews
tor regulation: sorting out the answers
thomas p. neufeld1,*
1 department of genetics, cell biology & development, university of minnesota, 6-160 jackson hall, 321 church street se,
minneapolis, mn 55455, usa
*correspondence: neufeld@ahc.umn.edu
doi 10.1016/j.cmet.2006.12.008
components involved in vesicle trafﬁcking processes such as secretion, endocytosis, and auto-
phagy are gaining recognition as important regulators and effectors of target of rapamycin (tor)
signaling. a recent report by devasahayam et al. (2006) now implicates pmr1, a secretory pathway
ca2+/mn2+ atpase located in the golgi apparatus, as a novel regulator of tor and its downstream
targets in yeast.
responding
the target of rapamycin (tor) ser/thr
protein kinases are highly conserved
regulators of eukaryotic cell growth
and metabolism,
to
changes in extracellular nutrient con-
ditions and other environmental sig-
nals to control a variety of growth-
related processes. in the presence of
ample nutrients, tor promotes pro-
tein synthesis directly through phos-
phorylation of
translation regulators
such as s6k and 4e-bp1 and indi-
rectly by promoting synthesis of the
rna and protein components of the
ribosome (reviewed in arsham and
neufeld, 2006).
in addition, active
tor signaling is required for efﬁcient
uptake of nutrients. in yeast, tor pro-
motes the activity of high-speciﬁcity
amino acid permeases such as tat2
and hip1 and inhibits the synthesis
and stability of
the general amino
acid permease gap1. downregulation
of both types of transporters occurs
in part
through ubiquitin-mediated
endocytic degradation from the cell
surface, as well as by the sorting of
newly synthesized permeases from
the golgi to the vacuole for destruc-
tion. a similar form of tor-dependent
endocytic regulation of nutrient trans-
porters appears to occur in animal
cells. in addition, recent work in dro-
sophila and mammalian cells has
shown that tor signaling promotes
bulk endocytosis/pinocytosis, poten-
tially providing an additional nonselec-
tive route of nutrient uptake (hennig
et al., 2006). in all eukaryotic cells,
nutrient withdrawal or
inhibition of
tor by rapamycin treatment induces
the self-digestive process of auto-
phagy, in which portions of cytoplasm
are engulfed within novel vesicle
structures for delivery to and degra-
dation within the lysosome/vacuole,
thus providing cells with an internal
source of nutrients sufﬁcient for pro-
longed survival.
these
effects of tor on vesicle trafﬁcking
pathways ensure that rates of protein
synthesis and ribosome biogenesis
are matched with an appropriate
supply of nutrients.
together,
the mechanisms by which cellular
nutrient status is assessed and con-
veyed to the tor pathway have been
elusive. in metazoan cells, a number
of signals such as growth factor,
oxygen, and atp levels are inte-
grated by the tumor-suppressor com-
plex tsc1/2. this complex possesses
gap activity toward the ras-related
gtpase rheb, which may directly
interact with and stimulate the kinase
activity of tor (long et al., 2005).
in contrast, nutrient
levels do not
appear to directly inﬂuence the activ-
ity of the tsc1/2 complex. interest-
ingly, the endocytic regulator hvps34
has recently been identiﬁed as a key
component of
the nutrient-sensing
signal upstream of tor in mammalian
cells (byﬁeld et al., 2005), again
highlighting an intriguing link be-
tween tor and vesicle trafﬁcking.
accordingly,
components
involved in tor signaling including
rheb, lst8 (a component of tor com-
plexes), and tor itself have been
localized to the golgi, endosomal,
or other vesicle compartments by
biochemical and immunohistological
methods (arsham and neufeld, 2006),
suggesting that
the control and/or
effects of these molecules may initiate
several
in part on intracellular membrane
surfaces.
the new study by devasahayam
and colleagues (2006) provides further
evidence of a connection between
tor regulation and vesicle trafﬁcking
in yeast. in a genomic deletion screen
for rapamycin-resistant mutants, the
authors identiﬁed the golgi-speciﬁc
ion pump pmr1 as a novel regulator
of tor signaling. pmr1 transports
ca2+ and mn2+ ions from the cyto-
plasm into the golgi lumen, thus pro-
viding components of the secretory
pathway with the high levels of ca2+
required for proper sorting and pro-
cessing. disruption of pmr1 causes
defects in proteolytic processing and
glycosylation, and an up to 50-fold in-
crease in secretion of heterologous
proteins normally destined for degra-
dation in the lysosome (rudolph
et al., 1989). the rapamycin resistance
of pmr1 mutants, as well as their ability
to suppress the rapamycin hypersen-
sitivity of an lst8 mutation, suggests
that pmr1 functions as a negative reg-
ulator of the rapamycin-sensitive tor
complex 1 (torc1). to directly test
whether tor activity is altered in
pmr1 mutants, devasahayam et al.
examined the nitrogen catabolite-
repressible (ncr) transcription factor
gln3, whose nuclear localization and
activity is inhibited by tor under
favorable nutrient conditions. gln3
displayed decreased nuclear
levels
and transcriptional activity in pmr1
mutants, consistent with an upregula-
tion of tor signaling.
in contrast,
pmr1 mutants displayed a signiﬁcant
increase in sorting of the gap1 perme-
ase to the plasma membrane, which
cell metabolism 5, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc. 3
cell metabolism
previews
to be at least partly due to
decreased plasma membrane
sorting of gap1 (tate et al.,
2006). an analysis of the effects
of pmr1 mutants on tor activ-
ity under different nutrient con-
ditions will help to clarify the
role of gap1.
second, the defect in ca2+
uptake by the golgi apparatus
in pmr1 mutants has been
shown to affect ca2+ concen-
trations in other cell compart-
ments. for example, pmr1 null
mutants have a signiﬁcant
reduction in free ca2+ in the
endoplasmic reticulum, fail to
degrade misfolded er proteins,
and display phenotypes con-
sistent with a defective un-
folded protein response (durr
et al., 1998). defective ca2+ up-
take by the golgi also results in
a higher concentration of ca2+
in the cytoplasm, which has
been shown to increase torc1
activity in some cell types. in
addition, the ca2+-dependent
phosphatase calcineurin has
recently been shown to inhibit
the rapamycin-insensitive tor
complex 2 (mulet et al., 2006).
to distinguish between the
roles of cytoplasmic versus
lumenal ca2+ in pmr1 mutant
phenotypes, it may be helpful
to examine the effects of altered
ca2+ concentrations on tor
signaling in pmr1 mutants.
figure 1. coordinate regulation of gap1 sorting and
tor regulation by pmr1 and the gse complex
(a) in wild-type yeast cells, the sorting (gray arrows) of newly
synthesized gap1 from the golgi apparatus to the plasma
membrane versus the vacuole is dependent on nutrient levels
and tor signaling. conditions of limited nutrients and low tor
activity promote sorting of gap1 to the plasma membrane,
where it functions to transport amino acids into the cell (white
arrow). plasma membrane sorting of gap1 requires the gse
complex, which also functions to promote tor signaling
(black arrow). under favorable nutrient conditions, gap1 is tar-
geted to the vacuole for degradation (represented by hatched
shading of gap1) in a pmr1-dependent manner. pmr1 activity
has a negative effect on tor signaling (black inhibitory arrow).
(b) in pmr1 mutants, gap1 is inappropriately sorted to the
plasma membrane under favorable nutrient conditions, and
tor activity is increased.
(c) loss of gse activity causes increased sorting of gap1 to
the vacuole for degradation and leads to a reduction in tor
activity. whether these effects on tor signaling result from
direct regulation by pmr1 and/or gse components, changes
in ﬂux through the secretory pathway, or altered intracellular
concentration of amino acids remains to be determined.
first, changes in tor activity caused
by mutations in pmr1 and gse com-
ponents may arise from changes in
intracellular amino acid concentra-
tions due to altered plasma membrane
sorting of gap1. for example,
the
increased nuclear localization and ac-
tivity of gln3 in npr1 mutants appears
finally, pmr1 belongs to the
spca family of ca2+ pumps,
which also serve to transport
mn2+ into the golgi apparatus.
interestingly, tor and related
kinases of
the pikk family
are uniquely sensitive to mn2+
concentrations, suggesting that
increased tor activity in pmr1
mutants could potentially arise
from abnormally high cytoplas-
mic mn2+ levels in these cells.
the ﬁndings of
devasahayam et al.
(2006) provide
evidence of an intriguing new mode
of tor regulation and highlight the
golgi apparatus as an important player
in tor signaling. a goal of
future
studies will be to determine whether
this function of pmr1 is conserved in
caveats aside,
normally occurs under condi-
tions of
low tor signaling.
this may reﬂect the sorting de-
fect inherent to pmr1 mutants.
alternatively, the altered locali-
zation and activity of both
gln3 and gap1 in pmr1 mu-
tants may result from increased
activity of npr1, a nutrient-reg-
ulated kinase that
functions
downstream of tor and that
the authors demonstrate is
also partially localized to the
golgi.
is reminiscent of
the coordinate effect of
pmr1 on secretory pathway
sorting and tor signaling re-
ported by devasahayam et al.
(2006)
the
recently identiﬁed gse com-
plex, an endosomal complex
that binds gap1 and directs it
to the plasma membrane.
in
contrast
to pmr1 mutants,
which target gap1 to the
plasma membrane and in-
crease tor signaling, muta-
tions in components of
the
yeast gse complex lead to de-
creased trafﬁcking of gap1 to
the plasma membrane (gao
and kaiser, 2006) and appear
to result in a reduction in tor
activity (dubouloz et al., 2005).
together, these new ﬁndings
are consistent with a model in
which a pool of tor, lst8,
and/or rheb at golgi and endo-
somal membranes may sense
nutrient status by monitoring
ﬂux through the endocytic and
secretory pathways (figure 1).
such a setting would allow
tor to efﬁciently coordinate
regulatory signals with trafﬁck-
ing-sensitive outputs. for ex-
ample,
rapamycin treatment
has been shown to result in
a rapid mobilization of the es-
sential autophagy protein atg9
from the trans-golgi network
to endosomal and autophagic mem-
branes (young et al., 2006).
this speculative model draws to-
gether observations from a number of
systems, and it should be noted that
the data of devasahayam et al. (2006)
do not rule out several potential indi-
rect effects of pmr1 on tor signaling.
4 cell metabolism 5, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc.
cell metabolism
previews
eukaryotes. mutations
higher
in
atp2c1, which encodes a human
homolog of pmr1, result in an auto-
somal dominant skin disorder known
as hailey-hailey disease, character-
ized by loss of adhesion between
epidermal keratinocytes. these cells
display abnormal actin dynamics
and reduced intracellular atp con-
centrations, which may potentially
be explained by defects in tor sig-
naling or by changes in secretory
trafﬁcking or ca2+ signaling. further
research is required to sort out the
possibilities.
references
arsham, a.m., and neufeld, t.p. (2006). curr.
opin. cell biol. 18, 589–597.
byﬁeld, m.p., murray, j.t., and backer, j.m.
(2005). j. biol. chem. 280, 33076–33082.
devasahayam, g., ritz, d., helliwell, s.b.,
burke, d.j., and sturgill, t.w. (2006). proc.
natl. acad. sci. usa 103, 17840–17845.
dubouloz, f., deloche, o., wanke, v., cameroni,
e., and de virgilio, c. (2005). mol. cell 19, 15–26.
durr, g., strayle, j., plemper, r., elbs, s., klee,
s.k., catty, p., wolf, d.h., and rudolph, h.k.
(1998). mol. biol. cell 9, 1149–1162.
gao, m., and kaiser, c.a. (2006). nat. cell biol.
8, 657–667.
hennig, k.m., colombani, j., and neufeld, t.p.
(2006). j. cell biol. 173, 963–974.
long, x., ortiz-vega, s., lin, y., and avruch, j.
(2005). j. biol. chem. 280, 23433–23436.
mulet, j.m., martin, d.e., loewith, r., and hall,
m.n. (2006). j. biol. chem. 281, 33000–33007.
rudolph, h.k., antebi, a., fink, g.r., buckley,
c.m., dorman, t.e., levitre, j., davidow, l.s.,
mao, j.i., and moir, d.t.
(1989). cell 58,
133–145.
tate, j.j., rai, r., and cooper, t.g. (2006). j.
biol. chem. 281, 28460–28469.
young, a.r., chan, e.y., hu, x.w., kochl, r.,
crawshaw, s.g., high, s., hailey, d.w., lippin-
cott-schwartz, j., and tooze, s.a.
(2006).
j. cell sci. 119, 3888–3900.
when is a heme transporter not a heme
transporter? when it’s a folate transporter
nancy c. andrews1,*
1 children’s hospital boston and harvard medical school, boston, ma 02115, usa
*correspondence: nandrews@enders.tch.harvard.edu
doi 10.1016/j.cmet.2006.12.004
essential nutrients enter the body through a variety of speciﬁc transporter molecules expressed in
the intestinal epithelium. a recent paper by qiu et al. (2006) elegantly demonstrates that one of these
transporters, previously thought to carry heme, is in fact an important folate transporter.
most essential nutrients cannot diffuse
freely through biological membranes.
instead, they enter cells through spe-
cialized transporter molecules, typi-
cally multipass transmembrane pro-
teins with exquisite speciﬁcity for their
substrates. to date, over 300 solute
carrier (slc) transporters have been
identiﬁed based on their structural
characteristics, but deﬁnitive physio-
logical functions have been assigned
to only a fraction of them. recently,
shayeghi and colleagues (2005) pre-
sented evidence that a novel trans-
transfers dietary
porter, slc46a1,
heme from the intestinal
lumen into
absorptive enterocytes. they identi-
ﬁed slc46a1 in a subtractive screen
for
intestinal molecules induced in
anemic, hypoxic mice carrying a spon-
taneous mutation in the serum iron
carrier transferrin. overexpression of
slc46a1 in cellular assays was asso-
ciated with heme transport activity,
and the endogenous intestinal protein
relocated from the cytoplasm to the
plasma membrane in response to iron
deﬁciency. based on their
results,
shayeghi et al. named this molecule
heme carrier protein 1 (hcp1).
in a recent issue of cell, qiu et al.
(2006) report a very different function
for slc46a1. using a data mining
approach based on weak homology
to the facilitative reduced folate car-
rier, they identiﬁed a series of candi-
dates for a previously characterized
yet elusive high-afﬁnity, ph-depen-
dent folate transporter activity (wang
et al., 2004). of the candidate mole-
cules, only slc46a1 showed mark-
edly diminished expression in a hela
cell subline selected for the loss of
high-afﬁnity folate transport activity.
when expressed in xenopus oocytes
or human hepatoma cells, slc46a1
conferred a proton-dependent folate
transport activity with substrate speci-
ﬁcity that matched the previously
described activity.
considering its folate transport capa-
bility, slc46a1 now appears to be
a poor heme transporter at best. the
km at ph 6.5 for 5-methyltetrahydro-
folate was measured at 0.8 mm (qiu
et al., 2006), whereas the km at neutral
ph for hemin (oxidized heme) was pre-
viously reported to be 125 mm (shaye-
ghi et al., 2005). any residual uncer-
tainty about the physiological role of
slc46a1 was dispelled by the ﬁnding
that a family with hereditary folate mal-
absorption carries a loss-of-function
splicing mutation in the slc46a1 gene
(qiu et al., 2006). the affected children
required high doses of supplemental
cell metabolism 5, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc. 5