journal of neuroscience research 85:2726–2740 (2007)
excitotoxic motoneuron disease in chick
embryo evolves with autophagic
neurodegeneration and deregulation of
neuromuscular innervation
jordi caldero´ , olga tarabal, anna casanovas, dolors ciutat, celia casas,
jero` nia llado´ , and josep e. esquerda*
unitat de neurobiologia cellular, departament de cie`ncies me`diques ba`siques, facultat de medicina,
universitat de lleida and institut de recerca biome`dica de lleida, catalonia, spain
in the chick embryo, in ovo application of nmda from
embryonic day (e) 5 to e9 results in selective damage to
spinal cord motoneurons (mns) that undergo a long-last-
ing degenerative process without immediate cell death.
this contrasts with a single application of nmda on e8,
or later, which induces massive necrosis of the whole spi-
nal cord. chronic mn degeneration after nmda implies
transient incompetence to develop programmed cell de-
ath, altered protein processing within secretory pathways,
and late activation of autophagy. chronic nmda treatment
also results in an enlargement of thapsigargin-sensitive
ca2+ stores. in particular mn pools, such as sartorius-
innervating mns,
the neuropeptide cgrp is accumul-
ated in somas, peripheral axons and neuromuscular junc-
tions after chronic nmda treatment, but not in embryos
paralyzed by chronic administration of curare. intramuscu-
lar axonal branching is also altered severely after nmda:
it usually increases, but in some cases a marked reduc-
tion can also be observed. moreover, innervated muscle
postsynaptic sites increase by nmda, but to a lesser
extent than by curare. because some of these results
show interesting homologies with mn pathology in human
sporadic als, the model presented here provides a valua-
ble tool for advancing in the understanding of some cellu-
lar and molecular processes particularly involved in this
disease. vvc 2007 wiley-liss, inc.
key words: excitotoxicity; motoneuron; als; chick
embryo; neuromuscular junction; nmda
glutamate mediated receptor excitotoxicity seems
to be an important mechanism in the pathogenesis of
many neurologic disorders, including motoneuron (mn)
degeneration in amyotrophic
(als)
(bruijn et al., 2004). although some particular properties
seem to make mns more vulnerable to glutamate exci-
totoxicity (van den bosch et al., 2006), they do not
explain the singularity of mn pathology observed in
als, which in certain aspects is markedly distinct from
that usually described in excitotoxic neurons (olney and
ishimaru, 1999). for example, neither the typical pattern
sclerosis
lateral
' 2007 wiley-liss, inc.
of excitotoxic necrosis nor apoptosis are consistently
found in sick mns of als; in contrast, atrophy, several
types of inclusion bodies, organelle damage and cytoske-
letal alterations are the most prominent
features of
degenerating mns in als (hirano, 1996; gue´gan and
przedborski, 2003).
we have developed a chick embryo model
in
which excitotoxicity produces slow mn degeneration,
which is more similar to als pathology than to conven-
tional acute excitotoxic paradigms. in previous studies
we have shown that chick embryo mns only become
highly vulnerable to externally applied excitotoxins after
they have reached a certain degree of maturation (for
instance, after embryonic day [e]-7). under these condi-
tions, mns rapidly and massively die due to excitotoxic
(caldero´ et al., 1997). however, when the
necrosis
application of the excitotoxic stimulus starts before the
acquisition of mn vulnerability and is chronically main-
tained, mns develop tolerance to acute excitotoxic ne-
crosis, but show long-lasting pathologic changes (tarabal
et al., 2001, 2005). in addition, chronic excitotoxic
mns are transiently incompetent to develop normal or
induced apoptotic programmed cell death (pcd) (llado´
et al., 1999; tarabal et al., 2005). pathologic alterations
sponsor: ministerio de ciencia y tecnologı´/feder;
contract grant
contract grant number: saf2003-01294, saf2005-01535; contract
grant sponsor: ministerio de sanidad y consumo; contract grant num-
ber: pi020035; contract grant sponsor: red de grupos de investigacio´n
cooperativa; contract grant sponsor: fundacio´ la marato´ de tv3;
contract grant number: 06030.
*jero` nia llado´’s current address is departament de biologia and iunics,
universitat de les illes balears, palma de mallorca, spain.
*correspondence to: josep e. esquerda, unitat de neurobiologia cellu-
lar, departament de cie`ncies me`diques ba`siques, facultat de medicina,
universitat de lleida, c. montserrat roig 2, 25008 lleida, catalonia,
spain. e-mail: josep.esquerda@cmb.udl.es
received 14 september 2006; revised 30 october 2006; accepted 7
november 2006
published online 22 january 2007 in wiley interscience (www.
interscience.wiley.com). doi: 10.1002/jnr.21174
observed in chronic excitotoxic chick embryo mns
include: changes in golgi apparatus organization, protein
retention within the endoplasmic reticulum (er), severe
autophagy, and increased neuroﬁlament phosphorylation.
some of these pathologic features are shared with human
and rodent als. embryos conforming to this paradigm
show altered neuromuscular activity and marked muscu-
lar atrophy, indicating that sick mns, although remain-
ing alive, are severely dysfunctional.
the increase in sprouting of
there is growing evidence that in the transgenic
mouse model of als, mn pathology starts distally at
the neuromuscular junction. this suggests that als may
be considered a ‘‘dying-back’’ axonopathy (fisher et al.,
2004). moreover,
some
intramuscular axons is a feature observed in human and
mouse als (millecamps et al., 2001; schaefer et al.,
2005). taking into account these aspects and the well-
established role of electrical activity in the control of
normally occurring mn death and neuromuscular synap-
togenesis (burek and oppenheim, 1999), we have ex-
plored how neuromuscular innervation could be affected
when mns are subjected to our excitotoxic paradigm.
the effects of chronic nmda treatment were compared
to those obtained after blockade of neuromuscular syn-
aptic transmission by curare. in addition we show that
calcitonin gene-related peptide (cgrp), a neuropeptide
that modulates the acetylcholine receptor (achr) syn-
thesis at
is differentially
regulated in the above-mentioned situations.
the neuromuscular
junction,
materials and methods
embryos and pharmacologic experiments
fertilized chicken eggs were purchased from sada
(lleida, catalonia, spain) and incubated in the laboratory at
37.58c and 45% relative humidity. at the time of sampling,
embryos were staged according to hamburger and hamilton
(1951). all experimental protocols used were approved by the
committee for animal care and use of the university of
lleida.
n-methyl-d-aspartic acid (nmda), kainic acid, a-
amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionate (ampa), and
quisqualic acid were from sigma (st. louis, mo); domoic
acid was from tocris cookson (bristol, uk); curare (d-tubo-
curarine) was from sigma.
these drugs were dissolved in saline and dropped in
volumes of 50–100 ll onto the chorioallantoic membrane
through a window in the shell. the standard protocol
for
chronic nmda administration was: 0.5 mg on e5 and e6,
and 0.25 mg on e7–9. for induction of acute excitotoxic ne-
crosis a single dose of nmda (from 0.1–0.5 mg) was applied
in embryos older than e8. similar doses were administered for
excitotoxins other than nmda. curare (2 mg) was applied
daily from e5–e9. embryos injected with identical volumes
of saline were used as controls.
histology and cell counts
embryos were ﬁxed in carnoy’s solution and processed
transverse sections were ob-
for parafﬁn embedding. serial
journal of neuroscience research doi 10.1002/jnr
nmda-induced chick motoneuron disease
2727
tained throughout the lumbosacral segment of spinal cord and
stained with thionin. apparently healthy mns and degenerat-
ing (pyknotic) cells located in the lumbar lateral motor col-
umn (lmc) were counted in every twentieth and tenth sec-
tion, respectively, according to criteria established previously
(clarke and oppenheim, 1995; caldero´ et al., 1997).
for electron microscopy, samples of chick embryo spinal
cord were ﬁxed by immersion in 0.1 m phosphate buffered
2.5% glutaraldehyde (ph 7.4) for 2 hr at 48c, post-ﬁxed in
1% osmium tetroxide-ferrocyanide, and embedded in embed
812 (electron microscopy sciences, fort washington, pa).
ultrathin sections obtained from selected ventral horn areas of
the lumbosacral enlargement were counterstained with uranyl
acetate and lead citrate, and observed with a zeiss em 910
(zeiss, oberkochen, germany) electron microscope.
immunocytochemistry and morphometric analysis
embryos were ﬁxed overnight with cold 4% paraformal-
dehyde in 0.1 m phosphate buffer (pb), ph 7.4, and cryopro-
tected with 30% sucrose in pb. after freezing, transverse sec-
tions
from the lumbar spinal cord or longitudinal sections
from dissected sartorius and ilioﬁbularis (ifib) muscles (16 lm
thick) were obtained and collected on gelatin-coated glass
slides. sections were then permeabilized with 0.1% triton x-
100 (sigma) in phosphate buffered saline (pbs), blocked in
appropriate normal serum, and incubated overnight at 48c
with one or two of the following primary antibodies: rabbit
anti-cgrp (1/1,000) from sigma, mouse anti-protein disul-
ﬁde isomerase (pdi, 1/400) from stressgen biotechnologies
(victoria, bc, canada), rabbit anti-lc3 (a generous gift from
drs. y. uchiyama and m. shibata, 1/300), mouse anti-sv2 (a
kind gift from dr. j. blasi, 1/200). after washing, sections
were incubated for 1 hr at room temperature with the corre-
sponding secondary ﬂuorescent-labeled alexa fluor antibodies
(1/500) from molecular probes (eugene, or) and the dna
indole and dihydrochloride
marker 4
(dapi, 50 ng/ml).
,6-diamidino-2 phenyl
in some experiments, dissected spinal cords were sec-
tioned with a vibratome (300-lm thick) and processed for
squash procedure as described previously (tarabal et al.,
2001). in squash preparations immunocytochemistry was car-
ried out as described above, using a rabbit anti-herc1 anti-
body (no. 407, kindly provided by dr. j.l. rosa, 1/1,000)
(rosa et al., 1996) combined with dapi for nuclear visualiza-
tion.
postsynaptic achrs were localized in muscle sections by
adding to secondary antibodies alexa fluor 488-conjugated
a-bungarotoxin (a-bgtx, 1 lg/ml) from molecular probes.
the number of neuromuscular synapses, deﬁned as the num-
ber of achr clusters from control, nmda (e5-9) and curare
muscles, was quantiﬁed by analyzing binarized low magniﬁca-
tion images using visilog 5 (noesis, orsay, france) software.
to measure the length of individual achr clusters, the same
analysis was applied on high magniﬁcation images captured
with a confocal microscope after z-projection of optical sec-
tions representing the whole thickness of the sample. several
different regions of each muscle were imaged. to analyze
intramuscular nerve branching, embryos were immersed in
2728
caldero´ et al.
dent’s ﬁxative at  208c and muscles were dissected and
processed for whole-mount immunocytochemistry with tuj1
monoclonal antibody (diluted 1/1,000; r&d systems, min-
neapolis, mn), which recognizes the neuron-speciﬁc class
iii b-tubulin, according to protocol described previously
(oppenheim et al., 2003).
images were obtained using a nikon eclipse 600 epiﬂu-
orescence microscope (nikon, tokyo, japan) equipped with
an astrocam cooled ccd camera ultrapix sk 1600 (perkin-
elmer, wellesley, ma). a fluoview 500 olympus (hamburg,
germany) confocal laser scanning microscope was also used.
in situ hybridization
lumbar spinal cord samples were ﬁxed overnight with
4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 m pb, ph 7.4, cryoprotected
with 30% sucrose, and then frozen. transversal cryostat sec-
tions (16-lm thick) were collected on silane-coated slides, air
dried, and stored at  808c until use. pblueskript-derived
(bdnf),
the receptor
plasmids containing full length cdnas for brain-derived neu-
rotrophic factor
tyrosine kinase b
(trkb) or ret receptor tyrosine kinase (ret), and a pgem-
derived plasmid in the case of glial cell line-derived neurotro-
phic factor (gdnf) family receptor-a1 (gfra1) (all gener-
ous gifts from dr. t. gould) were used to synthesize the anti-
sense and sense (control) riboprobes after linearization with
the appropriate restriction enzymes and transcription in vitro
in the presence of dig rna labeling mix digoxigenin-utp
(roche, mannheim, germany). alkaline hydrolysis was car-
ried out
to obtain rna fragments of 200–300 b length,
which were ethanol-precipitated and resuspended in milli-q
rnase free water. all probes were dot-blot tested using a
dig-labeled control rna (roche), as a control, and the
same alkaline phosphatase-conjugated anti-digoxigenin anti-
body used in the in situ procedure. further steps were carried
out as described previously (casanovas et al., 2001).
for quantiﬁcation, 8-bit digital black and white images
were analyzed with the ks100 software (kontron elektronik,
eching, germany). areas of
interest corresponding to mn
somas were manually segmented before densitometric evalua-
tion of grey levels. measures were normalized by subtracting
the corresponding background from each sample.
calcium imaging
cells were dissociated from dissected lumbar spinal cord
of e10 chick embryos treated previously in ovo with either
saline or chronic nmda. dye loading and measurement of
intracellular calcium concentration ([ca2+]i) were carried out
as follows: lumbar spinal cords were dissected in a physiologic
solution (ghebs) containing (in mm) 140 nacl, 2 kcl, 25
hepes ph 7.4, and 22 d-glucose; samples were then trans-
versely sliced (300-lm thick) using a mcilwain tissue chopper
(mickle laboratory engineering, gomshall, surrey, uk) and
ventral halves were further microdissected; samples were incu-
bated with 0.5 mg/ml porcine trypsin (sigma) dissolved in
ghebs at 378c for 13 min, and then the reaction was
stopped by adding 10% fetal calf serum; after mechanical dis-
sociation, cells were recovered and incubated with 5lm fura-
2/am dissolved in extracellular physiological solution contain-
ing (in mm) 150 nacl, 1 cacl2, 1 mgcl2, 5 kcl, 20 hepes
ph 7.4, 10 glucose and 0.1% bsa, for 30 min at 378c; and
ﬁnally, the cell suspension was placed on poli-l-lysine coated
glass coverslips in a perfusion chamber (warner instruments,
hamden, ct). calcium imaging was carried out using an
inverted epiﬂuorescence nikon eclipse te200 microscope
equipped with a spectramaster monochromator and a cooled
ccd camera ultrapix, all under the control of the ultraview
workstation (perkin-elmer). mns were identiﬁed easily by
their large size and shape. double excitation (340 nm and 380
nm) ratio images were captured with a 403, 1.3 na nikon s
fluor oil-immersion objective. recordings were carried out
during perfusion with different agents and at the end of the
experiments cells were treated with 10 lm ionomycin to re-
cord the maximum response. in experiments with glutamate
stimulation, mg2+ was omitted from the perfusion medium.
retrograde tracing of mns in isolated chick embryo
preparations
embryos were eviscerated and placed in a chamber per-
fused with oxygenated tyrode’s solution (containing in mm:
139 nacl, 17 nahco3, 5 kcl, 3 cacl2, 1 mgcl2 and 12.2
d-glucose). spinal cord and limb musculature were exposed
after a similar protocol
to that described by landmesser
(1978). either ifib or sartorius muscles were injected with 2–
3 ll of cholera toxin b subunit (ctb, 1 mg/ml, molecular
probes) conjugated with alexa fluor 488 distributed in three
intramuscular injections. in some cases, both muscles were
injected in the same embryo also using ctb-labeled alexa
fluor 555. bath temperature was raised to 28–308c and after
8 hr of transport, embryos were ﬁxed with 4% paraformalde-
hyde in 0.1 mpb, ph 7.4. serial sections of spinal cord were
either directly examined or
further processed for either
cgrp immunocytochemistry or complementary ﬂuorescent
nissl staining (neurotrace, molecular probes).
in some cases, the alexa fluor 488-conjugated tetanus
neurotoxin (tent) hc fragment (a generous gift from dr. g.
schiavo) was injected following the same procedure.
results
response of spinal cord motoneurons to
excitotoxins
the chick embryo is a good model for testing the
effects of excitotoxic agents acting on glutamate recep-
tors present in mns, as shown in previous work carried
out in our laboratory (caldero´ et al., 1997; llado´ et al.,
1999; tarabal et al., 2001, 2005). when applied in ovo,
a single dose of excitotoxins such as nmda, kainic
acid, domoic acid, quisqualic acid or ampa, produces
extensive neuronal death affecting the entire spinal cord.
depletion of mns is already detectable 3 hr after treat-
ment and the typical ultrastructural pattern of excitotoxic
necrosis is observed. dose-response experiments show a
very sharp proﬁle of transition between a non-effective
and effective dose of the excitotoxins. the acute excito-
toxic response is developmentally regulated, because to
obtain these effects, the insult has to be applied on e7 or
later. only minor alterations are detected when the exci-
journal of neuroscience research doi 10.1002/jnr
nmda-induced chick motoneuron disease
2729
fig. 1. a: changes in mn numbers (mean 6 sem) in the lumbar
lateral motor column of e10 chick embryos after treatment with sa-
line, different regimens of nmda or curare. nmda was either only
administered on e5 or e8 (acute treatment), or daily from e5–e9
(chronic treatment). doses of nmda: acute treatment ¼ 0.5 mg
(single dose); chronic treatment ¼ 0.5 mg on e5 and e6, and 0.25
mg on e7–e9. curare (2 mg) was applied daily from e5–e9. the
dashed line indicates the number of mns on e6. numbers in paren-
theses indicate sample sizes. *p < 0.01 and **p < 0.001 vs. saline
(student’s t-test). b–e: representative images of nissl stained spinal
cord sections of e10 embryos treated with: saline (b); curare (2 mg
from e5–e9, c); a single dose of 0.1 mg of nmda on e10 and
sampled 12 hr later (d); and chronic nmda from e5–e9 (e). note
the massive excitotoxic lesion and cellular loss in (d) and the absence
of lesions with enlarged lateral motor column (lmc) in (c) and (e).
in all cases, dorsal root ganglia (drg) seem unaffected. lmcs are
delimited by dotted lines. scale bar ¼ 200 lm (valid for c–e).
this
is administered before e7. to illustrate
totoxic agent
these results, in figure 1 we show the number of mns
on e10 after treatment with different regimens of in ovo
administered nmda: the explosive neuronal death seen
after a single excitotoxic pulse carried out once vulner-
ability is accomplished (e8) contrasts with the resistance
of mns to cell death when the system is preconditioned
by means of the chronic (daily, e5–9) administration of
excitotoxins before vulnerability is acquired on e5.
thus,
latter nmda administration protocol not
only prevents excitotoxic necrosis but also, unexpect-
edly, leads to an increase in the number of mns on e10
with respect to normal embryos. this is due to the fact
that mns not only become tolerant to excitotoxic ne-
crosis but also escape from normally occurring pcd,
which takes place in this system between e6 and e10
(fig. 1). however, a ﬁne cytologic examination after
chronic nmda treatment, shows that surviving mns
on e10 display chromatolytic-like changes with remark-
able subcellular alterations involving intracellular mem-
brane organelles. these consist mainly of a mild vacuoli-
zation and a redistribution of golgi proﬁles around
regions rich in er domains, in which aggregated pro-
teins are retained. this indicates that under chronic exci-
totoxicity protein transport along the secretory pathway
is altered severely. protein aggregation within er can
also be observed using an antibody against herc-1
protein (tarabal et al., 2005), which selectively recog-
nizes protein accumulation in mns, indicating the cell
type speciﬁcity of this change. to follow the long-term
fate of
these altered mns, chronic (e5–9) nmda-
treated embryos were sampled on e16–20. at these ages
an autophagic response was observed, involving seques-
tration of er domains with accumulated proteins, as
evidenced by electron microscopy (fig. 2a–d). activa-
journal of neuroscience research doi 10.1002/jnr
tion of the molecular pathway for autophagy can also be
shown by using speciﬁc markers such as beclin1 (tarabal
et al., 2005) and lc3 (fig. 2e,f). in some cases the
autophagic response, whether alone or in combination
with other undetermined factors, is extensive enough to
compromise mn survival: dark mns containing auto-
phagic vacuoles, swollen mitochondria, and hyperconvo-
luted nuclei, seem to be representative of this non-apo-
ptotic way of dying (tarabal et al., 2005). the morphol-
ogy of
shows comparable
features with those seen in human mn diseases;
for
instance, organelles sequestered by autophagic vacuoles
display ultrastructural
features similar to those seen in
bunina bodies of human als mns (okamoto et al.,
1993). moreover, apoptotic changes are quite difﬁcult to
see in als degenerating mns (gue´gan and przedborski,
2003).
these degenerating mns
in addition, chronic nmda treatment results in
altered embryonic motility, exhibiting a vigorous burst of
clonic-like leg activity on e10 that is followed by a marked
decrease in movement that persists until e20, an age at
which embryos, although alive, are unable to hatch (llado´
et al., 1999). a dysmorphic body with manifest muscle
atrophy is a characteristic feature of chronically treated
nmda embryos at late stages of development.
blockade of naturally occurring pcd in mns
after chronic excitotoxicity
we had shown previously (llado´ et al., 1999; tar-
abal et al., 2005) that chronic nmda treatment in a pe-
riod coinciding with normally occurring mn death
results in increased numbers of mns, as a consequence
of pcd inhibition. this was evidenced by the reduction
of pyknotic (apoptotic) mns at the peak of normally
2730
caldero´ et al.
fig. 2. protein retention in the er and delayed autophagy in mns
after chronic (e5–e9) treatment with nmda. a: the normal ultra-
structural appearance of er in e10 mns is depicted. b: a massive
disruption and vacuolization of er is produced in mns during exci-
totoxic necrosis 12 hr after administration of a single (0.1 mg) dose
of nmda on e10. c: after chronic nmda treatment, mns of
e10 embryos remain alive but display accumulation of aggregated
proteins within cisterns of er (*). d: on e16, er domains with
protein aggregates are sequestered by overlapping membranes as a
consequence of an autophagic response. compare the protein aggre-
gates in the er circumscribed by a single membrane layer on e10
(arrow in c) with the multiple layered membranes observed on e16
(arrows in d). protein aggregates can also be detected by herc1
immunostaining (green) carried out on squash preparations, as shown
in insets in (a), (c), and (d); cells were counterstained with dapi
(blue) for nuclear identiﬁcation. e, f: autophagic response involves
accumulation of lc3 immunopositive particles within the cytoplasm
of e16 mns after chronic (e5–e9) nmda treatment (f) but not in
mns of saline treated embryos (e); lc3 immunolabeling (green) was
combined with the er marker pdi (red) and dapi (blue). scale
bars ¼ 1 lm in (a) (valid for b–d); 20 lm in (e) (valid for f);
10 lm in insets.
fig. 3. chronic nmda treatment
transiently inhibits naturally
occurring and experimentally induced pcd of chick embryo mns.
a: number (mean 6 sem) of pyknotic cells in the lumbar lateral
motor column of e8 embryos treated from e5 with either saline or
nmda and subjected (axotomized) or not subjected (unoperated) to
unilateral limb ablation on e7. ipsi, ipsilateral side; contra, contralat-
eral side. b: number (mean 6 sem) of mns in the lumbar lateral
motor column of e16 chick embryos treated from e5–e9 with either
saline or nmda and subjected to unilateral limb ablation on e12;
the percentage of mn loss in the ipsilateral (axotomized) side vs. the
contralateral (non-axotomized) side is indicated. numbers in paren-
theses indicate sample sizes. *p < 0.01 vs. saline unoperated, #p <
0.01 vs. saline axotomized ipsilateral, **p < 0.001 vs. contralateral
side (student’s t-test).
occurring pcd (e8) (fig. 3a). in addition, even when
mn pcd was experimentally induced by means of ei-
ther limb bud removal (not shown) or axotomy (fig.
3a), it was clear that excitotoxic mns were reluctant to
undergo apoptosis. this effect was transient because after
e10, sick mns recovered the ability to die even after
mild insults (fig. 3b).
the promotion of mn survival after chronic
nmda treatment could be due to a preconditioning
effect of early excitotoxic stimuli carried out before vul-
nerability has been fully reached. in other model systems
it has been reported that protection against excitotoxicity
can be induced by preconditioning doses of glutamate or
nmda, in which neurotrophic factors (such as bdnf),
inducible heat shock proteins (hsps), and increased neu-
journal of neuroscience research doi 10.1002/jnr
nmda-induced chick motoneuron disease
2731
loaded with fura-2. representative
fig. 5. ca2+ responses of acutely isolated mns from e10 embryos
treated previously in ovo (e5–e9) either with saline or nmda.
mns were
recordings of
responses after stimulation with glutamate (a) or thapsigargin (b) are
shown. insets: the quantiﬁcation (mean 6 sem) of peak amplitude
evoked by glutamate with respect to the maximum evoked by iono-
mycin (10 lm, a) or when a plateau was reached after thapsigargin
(b)
indicate the number of
recorded mns. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.001 vs. saline (student’s t-test).
shown. numbers
in parentheses
is
the
structural
into account
was deduced from reductions in the levels of trkb and
bdnf mrnas observed in nmda treated embryos
(fig. 4a,b).
taking
alteration
involving er that we observed in mns during chronic
nmda treatment,
is plausible that a blockade of
protein translation due to stress in the er was responsi-
ble for the transient inhibition in mn pcd. in fact, it
has been shown that pcd can be blocked in chick
embryo mns by protein synthesis inhibitors (oppen-
heim et al., 1990). a more direct evaluation of protein
synthesis after nmda should be carried out to conﬁrm
this hypothesis.
it
fig. 4. time-course of changes in the expression of trkb (a) and
bdnf (b) mrnas in developing chick embryo spinal cord mns.
after in situ hybridization, the levels (mean 6 sem) of trkb and
bdnf mrnas were quantiﬁed as described, and represented as the
optical density of the signal. note the decrease in the levels of trkb
and bdnf mrnas observed in embryos chronically (e5–e9)
treated with nmda. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 vs. nmda (student’s
t-test). each point represents the values of 8–16 analyzed sections
from three embryos.
ronal ﬁring, play an important role (rocha et al., 1999;
soriano et al., 2006). we were unable to detect the
upregulation of several molecular chaperones in chick
embryo spinal cord after chronic nmda treatment
(tarabal et al., 2005). to evaluate how chronic excito-
toxic treatment affects the expression in mns of some
molecules involved in neurotrophic signaling, we exam-
ined mrnas of bdnf and its receptor trkb, and
ret and gfra1, the receptors for gdnf, by means
of
from
e5–e9. no changes were detected that could account
for the observed increase in mn survival: whereas levels
of ret and gfra1 were not modiﬁed by nmda
treatment (not shown), a decrease in bdnf signaling
in situ hybridization after nmda treatment
journal of neuroscience research doi 10.1002/jnr
fig. 6. cgrp upregulation in mns after chronic nmda treatment.
a, b: cgrp immunolabeling (green) in spinal cord mns of saline (a)
and nmda (e5–e9) (b) treated embryos. note the marked increase
in cgrp-ir in (b). c: cgrp-ir was quantiﬁed in mns through
the lumbosacral spinal cord segments, evidencing that cgrp upregula-
tion takes place only in the rostral segments. d–g
: sections of sarto-
rius (d, d
) muscles of saline
, g, and g
(d–e
) treated embryos were
double immunostained for tuj1 (green, d–g) for intramuscular nerve
identiﬁcation and cgrp (red, d
–g
). note the markedly positive
cgrp-ir acquired by sartorius
intramuscular axons after nmda
treatment. h, h
: the relationship between cgrp-ir localization
) and chronic nmda (e5–e9) (f–g
) and ifib (e, e
, f, and f
with intramuscular axons, nerve terminals and postsynaptic sites in sar-
torius muscles after chronic nmda treatment was visualized with a
confocal microscope after triple ﬂuorescent labeling with a-bgtx (green
in h), sv2 (blue in h
); to facilitate structure
) and cgrp (red in h
identiﬁcation, a-bgtx labeled postsynaptic sites
seen in (h) were
). i–i@: high magniﬁcation view of a triple ﬂuorescent
delineated in (h
labeled neuromuscular synapse identiﬁed by a-bgtx labeling (green)
showing the distribution of particles displaying either cgrp (red) or
sv2 (blue); note the absence of cgrp and sv2 colocalization in some
of the particles (presumably synaptic vesicles). scale bars ¼ 30 lm in
(a) (valid for b), 20 lm in (d) (valid for d
), and 5 lm in i (valid for i
and i@).
–g
) and in h (valid for
nmda-induced chick motoneuron disease
2733
fig. 7. intramuscular nerve branching in the ifib muscle on e10 in saline (control) (a), curare
(e5–e9) (b), or nmda- (e5–e9) (c, d) treated embryos. nerves were detected after b-tubulin
(tuj1) immunostaining in whole-mount muscle preparations. scale bar ¼ 500 lm (valid for
b–d).
chronic nmda treatment weakens mn
excitotoxicity and increases er ca2+ stores
deregulation of intracellular ca2+ ([ca2+]i) initiated
by ca2+ inﬂux is an essential element in promoting exci-
totoxic damage (arundine and tymianski, 2003). to
evaluate directly how [ca2+]i homeostasis was modiﬁed
by chronic nmda treatment, spinal cord mns were
acutely dissociated from e10 chick embryos, which
received either saline (control) or nmda in ovo from
e5–e9, and were loaded with fura-2 for [ca2+]i meas-
urements. under phase contrast, mns were identiﬁed
among other dissociated cells by their size and shape.
mns, perfused in physiologic solution, were able to
respond to k+ depolarization displaying [ca2+]i transients
(not shown). glutamate (250 lm) application also in-
duced ca2+ entry in mns from control and chronic
nmda-treated embryos, but the amplitude of the initial
increase in [ca2+]i was signiﬁcantly higher in the latter
(fig. 5a). preliminary results indicate that contrasting
with control mns, in which the initial [ca2+]i rise is
followed by a
sustained elevation and presumably
delayed [ca2+]i deregulation,
from nmda
treated embryos, the secondary [ca2+]i rise is usually fol-
lowed by a decrease, suggesting that [ca2+]i buffering
capacity was reinforced. we have suggested previously
that er calcium stores are expanded in excitotoxic mns
(tarabal et al., 2005). to further examine this point, af-
intracellular er-associated ca2+
ter the inhibition of
pump by thapsigargin (1 lm), the amount of releasable
ca2+ was measured in normal and excitotoxic mns: in
the latter, a signiﬁcant increase in the ca2+ response to
thapsigargin was observed (fig. 5b). the increase in
ca2+ buffering capacity would help to mitigate mn
damage, keeping the change in [ca2+]i levels evoked by
excitotoxins below the threshold required for excitotoxic
necrosis, but high enough to induce a long-lasting neu-
rodegenerative process.
in mns
journal of neuroscience research doi 10.1002/jnr
cgrp is upregulated in excitotoxic mns
cgrp is a neuropeptide present in a subpopula-
tion of mns and is transported axonally to the neuro-
muscular junctions where it seems to contribute to the
regulation of synaptic molecules such as achr and ace-
tylcholinesterase (fontaine et al., 1987; kashihara et al.,
1989; rossi et al., 2003). we observed that after chronic
nmda treatment, e10 chick embryo mns displayed
stronger immunoreactivity (ir) to cgrp than controls
(fig. 6a,b). fluorescence measurements of cgrp-ir
throughout the lumbar spinal cord showed that cgrp
upregulation was especially prominent at the rostral lev-
els (fig. 6c). cgrp-ir was extended to proximal den-
drites and often to axons. because it
is known that
camp increases in cells when cgrp interacts with its
receptor, and that rises in camp levels may promote
mn survival (hanson et al., 1998; brunet et al., 2007),
we wondered about the possible relationship between
cgrp upregulation and the increase in mn survival af-
ter chronic nmda treatment. the cgrp antagonist
a-cgrp 8-37 was administered daily in ovo (10 lg)
together with nmda,
from e5–e9. the number of
mns was compared to that obtained in embryos treated
with saline or nmda alone. mn counts carried out on
e10 indicated that the pharmacologic inhibition of en-
dogenous cgrp did not prevent the increases in mn
numbers induced by nmda (mn counts, expressed as
mean 6 sem, were: saline ¼ 12,297 6 705, n ¼ 6; sa-
line plus a-cgrp 8-37 ¼ 12,340 6 365, n ¼ 6;
nmda ¼ 16,013 6 749, n ¼ 6; nmda plus a-
cgrp 8-37 ¼ 16,484 6 580, n ¼ 5).
changes in neuromuscular innervation induced
by chronic nmda treatment
it would have been reasonable to expect that sev-
factors
synaptogenesis,
inﬂuencing neuromuscular
eral
2734
caldero´ et al.
fig. 8. a: density of neuromuscular synapses expressed as the num-
ber of achr clusters per area (1 mm2) of muscle section in muscles
from e10 embryos
treated with either saline, curare or chronic
nmda (e5–e9). data (mean 6 sem) were obtained after analyzing
25–54 microscopical ﬁelds in muscles from two to six embryos in
each experimental condition. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
vs. saline (student’s t-test). b: frequency distribution histograms of
the length of postsynaptic achr clusters in ifib muscle after saline,
curare or chronic (e5–e9) nmda treatment. note the decrease in
size of neuromuscular synapses observed after curare, which contrast
with the population of enlarged synapses evidenced after nmda.
asterisks indicate bars with sizes below the limit of visualization in
the main y scale; an enlarged y scale is shown in the inset graph.
insets are representative micrographs of ﬂuorescent a-bgtx labeled
neuromuscular synapses in ifib muscle. scale bar ¼ 20 lm (valid
also for curare and nmda).
such as cgrp levels or electrical activity in nerve and
muscle cells (dahm and landmesser, 1991; fournier le
ray et al., 1993), would be altered substantially by
chronic nmda treatment. for this reason we wanted
to explore whether the pattern of muscle innervation
was changed in this experimental paradigm. when intra-
muscular nerve branching was examined in the whole
ifib muscle from the e10 control and nmda treated
embryos, there was an evident increase in the density
and complexity of ﬁne branches
in nmda treated
embryos (fig. 7c and compare with fig. 7a). we occa-
sionally observed atrophied muscles full of aberrantly dis-
tributed and highly branched nerve ﬁbers
(fig. 7d).
nevertheless, in some cases, a marked decrease in the
density of
intramuscular nerve branches was observed,
probably indicating a great degree of mn damage in
certain speciﬁc embryos (not shown). as it has been
described by other laboratories (dahm and landmesser,
1988), we conﬁrmed the increased intramuscular nerve
branching in curare paralyzed embryos (fig. 7b). by
comparing nerve branching after
curare with that
observed after chronic nmda, we observed that the
overall architecture of branches after curare was well
preserved, whereas it appeared disrupted after nmda.
to determine how these changes in intramuscular nerve
branching inﬂuence neuromuscular synapse organization,
sections of sartorius and ifib muscles were examined af-
ter labeling achrs with ﬂuorescent a-bgtx. the den-
journal of neuroscience research doi 10.1002/jnr
nmda-induced chick motoneuron disease
2735
cular blockade by curare induces increased mn numbers
and synaptogenesis
(pittman and oppenheim, 1978;
oppenheim et al., 1989; dahm and landmesser, 1991),
we studied whether these changes were comparable with
the ones we obtained with nmda. our results indi-
cated that curare is more potent than nmda in increas-
ing neuromuscular synapse density (fig. 8a); by contrast,
the size of achr clusters in curare was lower than in
controls and nmda treated embryos (fig. 8b). in addi-
tion, when cgrp-ir was examined in sartorius muscle
from e10 nmda treated embryos, we found that most
intramuscular nerves and synapses were strongly immu-
, h–i@), whereas only very faint
nolabeled (fig. 6f, f
staining was detected in control muscles (fig. 6d and
), and no labeling was seen in curare treated embryos
(not
shown). cgrp-ir was completely negative in
ifib muscles, both in control and nmda treated
embryos (fig. 6 e, e
, g, and g
).
in the ventral horn of normal animals, only a pro-
portion of mns display cgrp-ir (villar et al., 1989;
caldero´ et al., 1992). we wanted to explore whether
the absence of cgrp in speciﬁc muscle nerves is due to
the fact they are innervated by a particular mn pool
with a negative phenotype for cgrp-ir. for this pur-
pose, retrogradely traced sartorius- or ifib-innervating
mns were immunostained for cgrp: about 3 lg
(1 mg/ml) of alexa fluor 555-labeled ctb or, alterna-
tively, alexa fluor 488-conjugated tent hc fragment
was injected into the corresponding exposed muscles of
e10 (control or nmda-treated) and maintained in an
ex ovo perfused preparation. results were evaluated by
examining cell body accumulation of the tracer in sam-
ples ﬁxed 8–10 hr after injection. both toxins were
transported with similar efﬁciency and accumulated into
the somas of the corresponding mn pool. we observed
that whereas 50.2% of sartorius-innervating mns were
cgrp immunopositive (n ¼ 486 mns counted), mns
innervating ifib muscle did not show any cgrp-posi-
tive immunolabeling. retrograde labeling also made it
possible to assess
the survival promoting effects of
nmda treatment in a speciﬁc mn pool. the number
and position of sartorius-traced mns was evaluated on
serial sections from the e10 control and nmda treated
embryos (fig. 9). in the latter, we observed an increase
in the size of the sartorius mn pool, with most of the
mns being localized at
their normal position in the
motor column of the lumbar spinal cord, although a
slight expansion from the lumbar to the most caudal
thoracic segments was also evidenced.
discussion
this
despite the considerable amount of progress made
during the last 2 decades toward the understanding of
als,
still remains an enigmatic disease in many
aspects (cleveland and rothstein, 2001). the availability
of a transgenic animal model expressing mutated human
cu/zn superoxide dismutase (gurney et al., 1994) has
provided a unique opportunity to develop experimental
fig. 9. sartorius mn pool traced by retrogradely transported alexa
fluor 488-labeled ctb injected in the muscle. injections were car-
ried out in an ex ovo preparation of e10 chick embryos treated pre-
viously in ovo with either saline (a) or nmda (e5–e9) (b). the
number (mean 6 sem) of labeled mns in serially sectioned spinal
cord is plotted in function of their localization along spinal cord seg-
ments. sample size: n ¼ 4 embryos in each condition. sections con-
taining alexa fluor 488-ctb labeled mns
(insets, right) were
counterstained with neurotrace green ﬂuorescent nissl stain (insets,
left). scale bar ¼ 100 lm.
sity of achr clusters
signiﬁcantly increased in both
muscles after nmda treatment (fig. 8a). after meas-
uring the size of individual achr clusters, neuromuscu-
lar junctions appeared to be smaller in sartorius muscles
than in controls (not shown). however, a small popula-
tion of very large achr clusters, which was not seen in
the controls, appeared in the ifib muscle of nmda
treated embryos (fig. 8b). achr clusters were always
innervated as evidenced after double labeling with tuj1
and sv2 antibodies (not shown). as chronic neuromus-
journal of neuroscience research doi 10.1002/jnr
2736
caldero´ et al.
work on this disease and also yielded the most relevant
advances
in the understanding of als. this animal
model has also been essential for designing and testing
future directions for als therapy (carrı´ et al., 2006).
transgenic animals are, however, models for a group of
familial als (fals), with this form of the disease repre-
senting <10% of als cases. sporadic als is the most
common form of the disease, accounting for about 90%
of cases and although its causes remain unknown, epide-
miologic studies indicate that toxic environmental factors
may be relevant (jackson and rosenfeld, 2001). this
seems very clear
in the case of als–parkinsonism–
dementia complex in the indigenous people of guam, in
which the disease has been associated with the ingestion
of b-methylamino-l-alanine (bmaa), a biomagniﬁed
slow-acting excitotoxin (cox et al., 2003). there is also
considerable evidence that glutamate receptor-mediated
excitotoxicity is a key factor in the pathogenesis of spo-
radic als, although it may also contribute to fals
(van den bosch et al., 2006). it has been shown in
organotypic spinal cord cultures that mns are preferen-
tially vulnerable to glutamate mediated excitotoxicity
(rothstein et al., 1993), with this system providing a
valuable model for studying the slow excitotoxic mn
degeneration that occurs in als. however, there are no
in vivo models
for chronic excitotoxic mn disease,
which makes it impossible to study the altered cellular
and tissular interactions
in the whole organism. we
show that in ovo chronic administration of nmda after
a particular regimen of treatment results in a long-stand-
ing degenerative process selectively affecting spinal cord
mns. although systematic studies of other regions of
the central nervous system have yet to be carried out,
we have no evidence of alterations in spinal cord inter-
neurons or dorsal root ganglia neurons. furthermore,
when the abnormal protein accumulation, which is in-
dicative of neurodegeneration in our model, was shown
by means of herc1 immunocytochemistry, only large
lateral motor column neurons were intensely immunola-
beled (tarabal et al., 2005). another interesting point
that can be inferred from our paradigm is that the secre-
tory pathway is a target that is particularly susceptible to
damage by slow acting excitotoxic insults. a detailed
pathologic examination unambiguously showed protein
retention within the er,
followed by an autophagic
response, as the most apparent change. the relative sig-
niﬁcance of the endomembrane organelle system, which
is extensively developed in large-sized and long-projec-
ting mns, could (along with other factors) account for
their particular response to excitotoxicity. in fact, dys-
functions of the secretory pathway and protein retention
within er with the activation of the er stress signaling
in mutant sod1 have been reported recently in mouse
als models (turner et al., 2005; kikuchi et al., 2006;
urushitani et al., 2006). moreover,
fragmentation of
golgi apparatus is a well described neuropathologic ﬁnd-
ing in mns of human and experimental als (gonatas
et al., 2006). the fact that protein aggregation inside
the er is also followed by cellular stress and a notable
degree of autophagy in liver cells in a
1-antitrypsin deﬁ-
ciency (teckman and perlmutter, 2000), suggests that
common cellular signaling pathways could be activated
in both cases: hepatocytes with mutated protein accumu-
lated in the secretory pathways, and excitotoxic mns
with presumptive posttranslationally modiﬁed proteins.
changes in the ionic environment (i.e., ca2+ depletion
by activation ca2+-induced ca2+ release [cicr] mech-
anism) inside the er, secondary to altered ca2+ entry
due to the excitotoxicity, could account for dysfunctions
in protein processing. all these data indicate that distur-
bances in intracellular protein trafﬁcking constitute im-
portant elements in the initiation of mn degeneration in
these models and probably also in human als.
that
autophagy is a prominent feature of the late evolu-
tion of mns damaged by chronic excitotoxic insult. ul-
trastructural examination shows
the autophagic
response involves the formation of new membrane folds
wrapping er domains with aggregated protein and
some organelles, such as mitochondria, later leading to
the formation of electron-dense structures resembling
bunina bodies, which are a pathologic hallmark of
human als (wada et al., 1999). molecules involved in
autophagy are present in excitotoxic mns as we showed
previously in the case of beclin1 (tarabal et al., 2005)
and also show here for lc3.
in contrast
to the acute excitotoxic necrosis
induced in spinal cord by excitotoxins applied in ovo
(caldero´ et al., 1997), one essential property of
the
model of chronic excitotoxic injury is that mns do not
suffer excitotoxic death when the same or even higher
doses of excitotoxin are applied. to obtain this result
chronic application of excitotoxin must start before vul-
nerability is attained. the results of [ca2+]i reported here
indicate that er ca2+ stores are enlarged after chronic
nmda treatment. the increased amplitude of the rapid
[ca2+]i response elicited by glutamate in nmda treated
mns may reﬂect an increased discharge of expanded
er-associated ca2+ stores when activated by the cicr
mechanism after glutamate-evoked ca2+ inﬂux. this
could be additional to the activation of the glutamate re-
ceptor-mediated ca2+ entry,
in a similar way to that
described after k+ depolarization in some cells, in which
the morphology of ca2+ transient evoked by k+ is
modulated by the activity of
the cicr mechanism
through er ca2+ stores (verkhratsky, 2005). the de-
layed [ca2+]i rise and deregulation of ca2+ homeostasis
after glutamate challenge are critical in determining exci-
totoxic cell death (tymianski et al., 1993; bano et al.,
2005). expanded er domains with improved capacity
in ca2+ buffering may contribute to preventing second-
ary ca2+ overload and excitotoxic necrosis as it seems to
occur in mns after chronic nmda treatment. this
would keep excitotoxin-induced ca2+ ﬂuxes below the
levels required to provoke an excitotoxic necrosis, but
high enough to chronically alter the intracellular ca2+
homeostasis sufﬁciently to initiate a long-standing degen-
erative process, in which disturbances in er and protein
transport function would be the main targets.
journal of neuroscience research doi 10.1002/jnr
its
we evidenced that cgrp accumulates
signiﬁ-
cantly in chronic excitotoxic mns. increased cgrp-ir
is also observed in diseased mns of human als (kato
et al., 1991) and sod1g93a transgenic mice (vlug
et al., 2005). moreover, cgrp is upregulated in axo-
tomized adult mns (caldero´ et al., 1992) and regenerat-
ing neuromuscular junctions (tarabal et al., 1996). it
seems that the cause of cgrp accumulation in chick
embryo excitotoxic mns is not the loss of axonal integ-
rity, because retrograde transport experiments show that
altered mns are connected with their muscle targets. at
present, we cannot determine whether increased cgrp
its upregulated synthesis or of
is a consequence of
decreased transport and mobilization of
secretory
vesicles. whatever the case, cgrp accumulation is not
only observed in the soma of excitotoxic mns, but also
in intramuscular axons and nerve terminals.
intramuscular nerve branching was
found to be
altered severely in all nmda-treated embryos, with it
clearly increasing in most cases. this increase in intra-
muscular nerve branching was correlated with the rise in
the number of synapses. increases in intramuscular nerve
branching, synapses and mn numbers also occur after
pharmacological blockade of neuromuscular
activity
(pittman and oppenheim, 1978; oppenheim et al.,
1989; dahm and landmesser, 1991), although,
in this
case, the location of mn pools within spinal cord (in
rostral-caudal and transverse planes) remains unchanged
(oppenheim, 1981). the fact that mns project to the
appropriate muscles
inhibited
prompted the assumption that normally occurring pcd
is not designed to remove errors in synaptic connectiv-
ity. we did, however, detect some differences between
nmda and curare in the neuromuscular
system of
chick embryo. first, we did not see any degenerative
change in mns after chronic curare treatment, even
when using electron microscopy (not shown). second,
the increases in the number of neuromuscular synapses
and axonal branches were both greater in curare than in
nmda, but the organization of their respective intra-
muscular nerves differed for
two conditions.
whereas the increase in the number of nerve branches
after curare treatment generally maintained a similar
intramuscular nerve architecture to that observed in nor-
mal embryos, in nmda samples, the augmented nerve
branches did not follow the ordered pattern seen in ei-
ther normal or curare-treated embryos. instead,
they
exhibited a highly disrupted organization, with this being
particularly evident in the most atrophied muscle samples
(fig. 7d). this
suggests a profound nmda-induced
pathologic alteration that contrasts with the type of
changes provoked by curare. after curare, the imbalance
in the activity-dependent signals, that normally regulate
intramuscular nerve branching and synaptogenesis, affects
the pattern of nerve branching without causing a pro-
nounced disruption of the normal neuromuscular scaf-
folding. moreover, it is also plausible that a particularly
nmda-vulnerable subset of mns could leave muscle
ﬁbers denervated; this would subsequently induce com-
even when pcd is
the
journal of neuroscience research doi 10.1002/jnr
nmda-induced chick motoneuron disease
2737
pensatory sprouting in other mns, which could be re-
sponsible for
the aberrant pattern of neuromuscular
innervation, as occurs
in the mutant sod1 mouse
model of als (schaefer et al., 2005). third, the size of
postsynaptic achr clusters in the ifib muscle of cu-
rare-treated embryos was smaller than in the controls,
whereas
it clearly increased after nmda treatment.
fourth, after nmda, mn pools differ from those found
in either control or curare-treated embryos (landmesser,
1978; oppenheim, 1981), because labeled mn extend
to both the thoracic and caudal lumbar regions of spinal
cord. although we cannot rule out the possibility of
some tracer leakage in muscles altered by nmda may
contribute to the observed expansion of
labeled mn
pools, we think that mn soma mislocation mainly
relates
that are pathologically-
induced under chronic excitotoxicity. in fact, for devel-
oping mns, normal bursting activity seems
to be
required for correct motor axon guidance, and misplaced
sartorius mns were also found in thoracic segments of
spinal cord in chick embryos after pharmacological alter-
ation of spinal cord rhythmic activity (hanson and land-
messer, 2004).
to aberrant projections
another striking difference was
the presence of
cgrp accumulation in the intramuscular nerves of sar-
torius muscle observed after nmda treatment, which
did not appear after curare treatment. it is likely that ac-
tivity-regulated molecules involved in the regulation of
neuromuscular synaptogenesis, such as neuregulins, are
differentially expressed after curare and nmda. it has
been shown that the blockade of synaptic activity with
curare reduces
synaptic neuregulin accumulation and
neurotrophic factor expression in muscle, producing an
increase in the number and decrease in the size of neu-
romuscular junctions (loeb et al., 2002). as nmda
receptors play a role in mn activity in the chick embryo
(sernagor et al., 1995; moore et al., 1999), it is plausible
that neuromuscular activity is
increased after chronic
nmda treatment, with neuregulin and muscle neuro-
trophic factors being upregulated, rather than downregu-
lated as occurs with curare. neuregulin is sensitive to
changes in neuronal activity and it has been shown that
its levels in the brain increase after treatment with the
excitotoxin kainic acid (eilam et al., 1998). it is also
likely that altered axons in nmda treated embryos are
unable to respond to the normal axonal guidance cues
and signals that regulate synaptogenesis in such a way
that aberrant neuromuscular innervation would be pro-
moted.
that
regulates
although cgrp is a factor
the
expression of neuromuscular synapse molecules, it is dif-
ﬁcult to understand its precise role in synaptogenesis.
however, the fact that transgenic mice lacking cgrp
expression fail
in neuromuscular
junctions (lu et al., 1999), suggests that it may function
redundantly,
that
induce the expression of achr, such as neuregulin. the
larger sized motor endplates that we observed in nmda
treated embryos occur in ifib muscle in which cgrp
together with other neural
to display alterations
factors
2738
caldero´ et al.
is absent. the lack of cgrp in sartorius axonal
branches of curare treated embryos together with the
presumptive downregulation of neuregulin (loeb et al.,
2002) may favor the abundance of
(immature)
neuromuscular synapses. it has been suggested that early
aspects of synapse formation could be independent of ac-
tivity, whereas this is required for later synapse matura-
tion (kummer et al., 2006). to better understand the
molecular basis of altered axonal branching and synapto-
genesis after nmda, the expression of neuregulin, neu-
rotrophic factors, and other molecules should be further
analyzed.
small
in summary, we present an experimental model in
which a mn disease is developed by an external excito-
toxic agent in the absence of any particular genetic back-
ground. many aspects make this model a valuable tool
in the context of als research. for instance, mns are
selectively damaged after a long-standing process of dys-
function, which implies a neurodegenerative phenotype
that is not initially associated with a cell death execution
process. altered protein processing within secretory
pathways and subsequent activation of molecular ma-
chinery for autophagy are prominent features in degen-
erating mns in this model. all these aspects have also
been recognized recently in the most extensively studied
transgenic animal models of als. taking the unique ex-
perimental advantages of chick embryo,
including the
most recent developments, such as in ovo electropora-
tion (nakamura et al., 2004) or long-term spinal cord
slice cultures (brunet et al., 2007), this model provides a
valuable tool for advancing in the further understanding
of some of the cellular and molecular processes involved
in sporadic als.
acknowledgments
we thank drs. y. uchiyama and m. shibata for
anti-lc3 antibody, dr. j. blasi for anti-sv2 antibody,
dr. j.l. rosa for anti-herc1 (no. 407) antibody and
dr. t. gould for providing the plasmids for in situ
hybridization. we also thank i. montoliu, m. hereu,
and c. guerris for technical assistance. contract grant
sponsor: ministerio de ciencia y tecnologı´a ﬁnanced
jointly with
numbers:
saf2003-01294 (j.c.)
and saf2005-01535 (j.e.e.);
contract grant sponsor: ministerio de sanidad y con-
sumo; contract grant number: pi020035 and red de
grupos de investigacio´n cooperativa (j.e.e.). contract
grant sponsor: fundacio´ la marato´ de tv3; contract
grant number: 063030 (j.e.e.).
feder; contract
grant
references
arundine m, tymianski m. 2003. molecular mechanisms of calcium-
dependent neurodegeneration in excitotoxicity. cell calcium 34:325–
337.
bano d, young kw, guerin cj, lefeuvre r, rothwell nj, naldini l,
the plasma
rizzuto r, carafoli e, nicotera p. 2005. cleavage of
membrane na+/ca2+ exchanger in excitotoxicity. cell 120:275–285.
bruijn li, miller tm, cleveland dw. 2004. unraveling the mechanisms
involved in motor neuron degeneration in als. annu rev neurosci
27:723–749.
brunet n, tarabal o, portero-otin m, oppenheim rw, esquerda je,
caldero´ j. 2007. survival and death of mature avian motoneurons in
organotypic slice culture: trophic requirements for survival and different
types of degeneration. j comp neurol (in press).
burek mj, oppenheim rw. 1999. cellular interactions that regulate
programmed cell death in the developing vertebrate nervous system. in:
koliatsos ve, ratan rr, editors. cell death and diseases of the nerv-
ous system. totowa: humana press inc. p 145–179.
caldero´ j, casanovas a, sorribas a, esquerda je. 1992. calcitonin gene-
related peptide in rat spinal cord motoneurons: subcellular distribution
and changes induced by axotomy. neuroscience 48:449–461.
caldero´ j, ciutat d, llado´ j, casta´n e, oppenheim rw, esquerda je.
1997. effects of excitatory amino acids on neuromuscular development
in the chick embryo. j comp neurol 387:73–95.
carrı´ mt, grignaschi g, bendotti c. 2006. targets in als: designing
multidrug therapies. trends pharmacol sci 27:267–273.
casanovas a, ribera j, hager g, kreutzberg gw, esquerda je. 2001.
c-jun regulation in rat neonatal motoneurons post axotomy. j neurosci
res 63:469–479.
clarke pgh, oppenheim rw. 1995. neuron death in vertebrate devel-
opment:
in vivo methods. in: schwartz lm, osborne ba, editors.
methods in cell biology: cell death. vol. 46: new york: academic
press. p 277–321.
cleveland dw, rothstein jd. 2001. from charcot to lou gehrig: deci-
phering selective motor neuron death in als. nat rev neurosci 2:
806–819.
cox pa, banack sa, murch sj. 2003. biomagniﬁcation of cyanobacteria
neurotoxins and neurodegenerative disease among the chamorro peo-
ple of guam. proc natl acad sci u s a 100:13380–13383.
dahm lm, landmesser lt. 1988. the regulation of intramuscular nerve
branching during normal development and following activity blockade.
dev biol 130:621–644.
dahm lm, landmesser lt. 1991. the regulation of synaptogenesis dur-
ing normal development and following activity blockade. j neurosci
11:238–255.
eilam r, pinkas-kramarski r, ratzkin bj, segal m, yarden y. 1998.
activity-dependent regulation of neu differentiation factor/neure-
gulin expression in rat brain. proc natl acad sci u s a 95:1888–
1893.
fisher lr, culver dg, tennant p, davis aa, wang ng, castellano-
sanchez a, khan j, polak ma, glass jd. 2004. amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis is a distal axonopathy: evidence in mice and man. exp neurol
185:232–240.
fontaine b, klarsfeld a, changeux jp. 1987. calcitonin gene-related
peptide and muscle activity regulate acetylcholine receptor alpha-subu-
nit mrna levels by distinct intracellular pathways. j cell biol 105:
1337–1342.
fournier le ray c, prevette d, oppenheim rw, fontaine-perus j.
1993. interactions between spinal cord stimulation and activity blockade
in the regulation of synaptogenesis and motoneuron survival
in the
chick embryo. j neurobiol 24:1142–1156.
gonatas nk, stieber a, gonatas jo. 2006. fragmentation of the golgi
apparatus in neurodegenerative diseases and cell death. j neurol sci 246:
21–30.
gue´gan c, przedborski s. 2003. programmed cell death in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. j clin invest 111:153–161.
gurney me, pu h, chiu ay, dal canto mc, polchow cy, alexander
dd, caliendo j, hentati a, kwon yw, deng hx, chen w, zhai p,
suﬁt ri, siddique t. 1994. motor neuron degeneration in mice that
express a human cu, zn superoxide dismutase mutation. science 264:
1772–1775.
journal of neuroscience research doi 10.1002/jnr
nmda-induced chick motoneuron disease
2739
hamburger v, hamilton hl. 1951. a series of normal stages in the de-
velopment of the chick embryo. j morphol 88:49–92.
hanson mg, landmesser lt. 2004. normal patterns of spontaneous ac-
tivity are required for correct motor axon guidance and the expression
of speciﬁc guidance molecules. neuron 43:687–701.
hanson mg, shen s, wiemelt ap, mcmorris fa, barres ba. 1998.
cyclic amp elevation is sufﬁcient to promote the survival of spinal
motor neurons in vitro. j neurosci 18:7361–7371.
hirano a. 1996. neuropathology of als: an overview. neurology
47(suppl):s63–s66.
jackson ce, rosenfeld j. 2001. motor neuron disease. phys med reha-
bil clin n am 12:335–352.
oppenheim rw, prevette d, tytell m, homma s. 1990. naturally
occurring and induced neuronal death in the chick embryo in vivo
requires protein and rna synthesis: evidence for the role of cell death
genes. dev biol 138:104–113.
oppenheim rw, caldero´ j, cuitat d, esquerda j, ayala v, prevette d,
wang s. 2003. rescue of developing spinal motoneurons from pro-
grammed cell death by the gaba(a) agonist muscimol acts by blockade
of neuromuscular activity and increased intramuscular nerve branching.
mol cell neurosci 22:331–343.
pittman rh, oppenheim rw. 1978. neuromuscular blockade increases
motoneuron survival during normal cell death in the chick embryo.
nature 271:364–365.
kashihara y, sakaguchi m, kuno m. 1989. axonal transport and distri-
bution of endogenous calcitonin gene-related peptide in rat peripheral
nerve. j neurosci 9:3796–3802.
rocha m, martins rap, linden r. 1999. activation of nmda recep-
tors protects against glutamate neurotoxicity in the retina: evidence for
the involvement of neurotrophins. brain res 827:79–92.
kato t, hirano a, manaka h, sasaki h, katagiri t, kawanami t, shi-
kama y, seino t, sasaki h. 1991. calcitonin gene-related peptide
immunoreactivity in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. neurosci lett
133:163–167.
kikuchi h, almer g, yamashita s, guegan c, nagai m, xu z, sosunov
aa, mckhann gm 2nd, przedborski s. 2006. spinal cord endoplasmic
reticulum stress associated with a microsomal accumulation of mutant
superoxide dismutase-1 in an als model. proc natl acad sci u s a
103:6025–6030.
kummer tt, misgeld t, sanes jr. 2006. assembly of the postsynaptic
membrane at the neuromuscular junction: paradigm lost. curr opin
neurobiol 16:74–82.
landmesser l. 1978. the distribution of motoneurones supplying chick
hind limb muscles. j physiol 284:371–389.
rosa jl, casaroli-marano rp, buckler aj, vilaro´ s, barbacid m. 1996.
p619, a giant protein related to the chromosome condensation regulator
rcc1, stimulates guanine nucleotide exchange on arf1 and rab
proteins. embo j 15:4262–4273.
rossi sg, dickerson im, rotundo rl. 2003. localization of the calci-
tonin gene-related peptide receptor complex at the vertebrate neuro-
muscular junction and its role in regulating acetylcholinesterase expres-
sion. j biol chem 278:24994–25000.
rothstein jd, jin l, dykes-hoberg m, kuncl rw. 1993. chronic inhi-
bition of glutamate uptake produces a model of slow neurotoxicity.
proc natl acad sci u s a 90:6591–6595.
schaefer am, sanes jr, lichtman jw. 2005. a compensatory subpopula-
tion of motor neurons in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclero-
sis. j comp neurol 490:209–219.
llado´ j, caldero´ j, ribera j, tarabal o, oppenheim rw, esquerda je.
1999. opposing effects of excitatory amino acids on chick embryo spi-
nal cord motoneurons: excitotoxic degeneration or prevention of pro-
grammed cell death. j neurosci 19:10803–10812.
sernagor e, chub n, ritter a, o’donovan mj. 1995. pharmacological
characterization of
the rhythmic synaptic drive onto lumbosacral
motoneurons in the chick embryo spinal cord. j neurosci 15:7452–
7464.
loeb ja, hmadcha a, fischbach gd, land sj, zakarian vl. 2002. neu-
regulin expression at neuromuscular synapses is modulated by synaptic
activity and neurotrophic factors. j neurosci 22:2206–2214.
lu jt, son yj, lee j, jetton tl, shiota m, moscoso l, niswender kd,
loewy ad, magnuson ma, sanes jr, emeson rb. 1999. mice lack-
ing alpha-calcitonin gene-related peptide exhibit normal cardiovascular
regulation and neuromuscular development. mol cell neurosci 14:99–
120.
millecamps s, nicolle d, ceballos-picot i, mallet j, barkats m. 2001. syn-
aptic sprouting increases the uptake capacities of motoneurons in amyo-
trophic lateral sclerosis mice. proc natl acad sci u s a 98:7582–7587.
moore le, chub n, tabak j, o’donovan m. 1999. nmda-induced
dendritic oscillations during a soma voltage clamp of chick spinal neu-
rons. j neurosci 19:8271–8280.
nakamura h, katahira t, sato t, watanabe y, funahashi j. 2004. gain-
and loss-of-function in chick embryos by electroporation. mech dev
121:1137–1143.
okamoto k, hirai s, amari m, watanabe m, sakurai a. 1993. bunina
bodies in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis immunostained with rabbit anti-
cystatin c serum. neurosci lett 162:125–128.
olney jw, ishimaru mj. 1999. excitotoxic cell death. in: koliatsos ve
and ratan rr, editors. cell death and diseases of the nervous system.
totowa: humana press inc. p 197–219.
oppenheim rw. 1981. cell death of motoneurons in the chick embryo
spinal cord. v. evidence on the role of cell death and neuromuscular
function in the formation of speciﬁc peripheral connections. j neurosci
1:141–151.
oppenheim rw, bursztajn s, prevette d. 1989. cell death of moto-
neurons in the chick embryo spinal cord. xi. acetylcholine receptors
and synaptogenesis in skeletal muscle following the reduction of moto-
neuron death by neuromuscular blockade. development 107:331–341.
soriano fx, papadia s, hofmann f, hardingham nr, bading h, hardi-
ngham ge. 2006. preconditioning doses of nmda promote neuro-
protection by enhancing neuronal excitability. j neurosci 26:4509–
4518.
tarabal o, caldero´ j, ribera j, sorribas a, lopez r, molgo j, esquerda
je. 1996. regulation of motoneuronal calcitonin gene-related pep-
tide (cgrp) during axonal growth and neuromuscular synaptic plas-
ticity induced by botulinum toxin in rats. eur j neurosci 8:829–
836.
tarabal o, caldero´ j, llado´ j, oppenheim rw, esquerda je. 2001.
long-lasting aberrant tubulovesicular membrane inclusions accumulate
in developing motoneurons after a sublethal excitotoxic insult: a possi-
ble model for neuronal pathology in neurodegenerative disease. j neu-
rosci 21:8072–8081.
tarabal o, caldero´ j, casas c, oppenheim rw, esquerda je. 2005.
protein retention in the endoplasmic reticulum, blockade of pro-
grammed cell death and autophagy selectively occur in spinal cord
motoneurons after glutamate receptor-mediated injury. mol cell neu-
rosci 29:283–298.
teckman jh, perlmutter dh. 2000. retention of mutant alpha(1)-
antitrypsin z in endoplasmic reticulum is associated with an auto-
phagic response. am j physiol gastrointest liver physiol 279:g961–
g974.
turner bj, atkin jd, farg ma, zang da w, rembach a, lopes
ec, patch jd, hill af, cheema ss. 2005. impaired extracellular
secretion of mutant superoxide dismutase 1 associates with neuro-
toxicity in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. j neurosci 25:108–
117.
tymianski m, charlton mp, carlen pl, tator ch. 1993. source speci-
ﬁcity of early calcium neurotoxicity in cultured embryonic spinal neu-
rons. j neurosci 13:2085–2104.
journal of neuroscience research doi 10.1002/jnr
2740
caldero´ et al.
urushitani m, sik a, sakurai t, nukina n, takahashi r, julien jp.
2006. chromogranin-mediated secretion of mutant superoxide dismu-
tase proteins linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. nat neurosci 9:
108–118.
van den bosch l, van damme p, bogaert e, robberecht w. 2006. the
role of excitotoxicity in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
biochim biophys acta 1762:1068–1082.
verkhratsky a. 2005. physiology and pathophysiology of the calcium store
in the endoplasmic reticulum of neurons. physiol rev 85:201–279.
villar mj, roa m, huchet m, hokfelt t, changeux jp, fahrenkrug j,
brown jc, epstein m, hersh l. 1989. immunoreactive calcitonin
gene-related peptide, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, and somatostatin
in developing chicken spinal cord motoneurons. eur j neurosci 1:269–
287.
vlug as, teuling e, haasdijk ed, french p, hoogenraad cc, jaarsma
d. 2005. atf3 expression precedes death of spinal motoneurons in
sclerosis-sod1 transgenic mice and correlates
amyotrophic lateral
with c-jun phosphorylation, chop expression,
somato-dendritic
ubiquitination and golgi
fragmentation. eur j neurosci 22:1881–
1894.
wada m, uchihara t, nakamura a, oyanagi k. 1999. bunina bodies in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis on guam: a histochemical, immunohisto-
chemical and ultrastructural investigation. acta neuropathol (berl) 98:
150–156.
journal of neuroscience research doi 10.1002/jnr