marine environmental research 62 (2006) s433–s438
www.elsevier.com/locate/marenvrev
marine
environmental
research
short communication
lysosomal responses to nutritional and
contaminant stress in mussel hepatopancreatic
digestive cells: a modelling study
allan mcveigh a,b,*, michael moore a, j. icarus allen a, phil dyke b,c
a plymouth marine laboratory, prospect place, the hoe, plymouth pl1 3dh, uk
b university of plymouth, school of mathematics & statistics, drake circus, plymouth pl4 8aa, uk
c university of plymouth, school of computing, communications & electronics, drake circus,
plymouth pl4 8aa, uk
abstract
the lysosomal system occupies a central and crucial role in cellular food degradation (intracellu-
lar digestion), toxic responses and internal turnover (autophagy) of the hepatopancreatic digestive
cell of the blue mussel mytilus edulis. understanding the dynamic response of this system requires
factors aﬀecting performance, conceived as a function of the throughput, degradative eﬃciency
and lysosomal membrane stability, to be deﬁned and quantiﬁed. a previous carbon/nitrogen ﬂux
model has been augmented by separately identifying lysosomal ‘target’ material (autophagocytosed
or endocytosed proteins, carbohydrates and lipids) and ‘internal’ material (digestive enzymes and
lipid membrane components). additionally, the whole cell’s energetic costs for maintaining lyso-
somal ph and production of these internal components have been incorporated, as has the poten-
tially harmful eﬀect of generation of lipofuscin on the transitory and semi-permanent lysosomal
constituents. inclusion of the three classes of nutrient organic compounds at the whole cell level
allows for greater range in the simulated response, including deamination of amino acids to provide
molecules as a source of energy, as well as controlling nitrogen and carbon concentrations in the
cytosol. coupled with a more functional framework of pollutant driven reactive oxygen species
(ros) production and antioxidant defence, the separate and combined eﬀects of three stressors
(nutritional quality, nutrient quantity and a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon [pah-phenanthrene])
on the digestive cell are simulated and compare favourably with real data.
ó 2006 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
* corresponding author.
e-mail address: almv@pml.ac.uk (a. mcveigh).
0141-1136/$ - see front matter ó 2006 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.marenvres.2006.04.021
s434
a. mcveigh et al. / marine environmental research 62 (2006) s433–s438
keywords: cellular model; lysosomes; environmental prognostics; starvation-induced autophagy; nutritional
stress
interactive cellular responses to combinations of stress often give rise to surprising
emergent properties. modelling facilitates the integration of separately observed responses
into whole system behaviour. additionally, the rigour involved in constructing a mathe-
matically conserved system highlights gaps in current knowledge, enabling the focusing
of future experimentation. this paper describes recent eﬀorts to simulate the behaviour
of a marine mussel (mytilus edulis) hepatopancreatic digestive cell, both throughout an
annual cycle, and in a short-term exposure experiment designed to simulate the apparent
protective properties of short-term starvation induced autophagy against pah toxicity.
previous attempts to simulate digestive cell behaviour by carbon/nitrogen compartment
based models (moore and allen, 2002; mcveigh et al., 2004) have now been superseded by
modelling the pathways of the three classes of nutrient organic compounds (lipid, protein
and carbohydrates) and their subunits. the reason for this change was to allow for a more
realistic simulation of the lysosomal degradative capability, considered central to the
healthy functioning of the cell. the lysosomal compartment is now typiﬁed by three fea-
tures: amount of ‘target’ (endocytosed and autophagocytosed) material, lysosomal degra-
dative capacity (based on lysosomal digestive enzyme concentration) and membrane lipid
content (to reﬂect lysosomal stability). a throughput of successfully degraded material is
then determined based on the state of these three variables.
further enhancements to the previous model include: (1) an integrated control strategy
whereby cellular volume is controlled by the availability of amino acids (for protein syn-
thesis), lipid (for membrane components) and appropriate energy stores together dictating
the rates of excretion, deamination, protein synthesis, glycogen storage and release; (2) the
respiration rate is now determined by a cellular activity function incorporating processes
such as food uptake, endosome and lysosome ph maintenance, protein synthesis and anti-
oxidant defences; (3) damage to internal viable components in all three compartments
dependent on reactive oxygen species (ros) concentrations; from which basal autophagy
rates are determined and augmented by nutritional stress; (4) a new toxicity model which
provokes enhanced ros generation linearly according to both concentration and toxicity
of pollutant (allen and mcveigh, 2004); and (5) a three phase digestive tubule temporal
system, based on langton (1975) without the reconstituting phase, and a theoretical–sto-
chastic–physical endocytosis rate incorporated to better simulate daily and tidal cycle
dependent nutrient uptake.
the eﬀectiveness of these modiﬁcations stimulated further inclusions and consider-
ations such as: a system of endosomal and lysosomal lipid and degradative enzyme replen-
ishment; antioxidant defences with consideration of cost to the cell; loss kinetics of
pollutants are taken into account in order to simulate concentrations; and incorporation
of residual bodies into cytosol compartment between the beginning of the holding phase
through the feeding phase until expulsion during the disintegrating phase. a paper
describing the redesigned model in detail is in preparation (see fig. 1).
the ﬁrst validation test of the model was a simulation of an annual cycle by providing a
seasonal food pattern in terms of availability and quality. the simulation is compared with
observed seasonal data for the biochemical composition of the non-mantle tissues (gabbott
and bayne, 1973) in fig. 2(a–d). starting after the spawning period in the spring and early
a. mcveigh et al. / marine environmental research 62 (2006) s433–s438
s435
food 
(particulate 
carbon and 
nitrogen) 
krec 
kend 
cytoplasm 
kr 
endosome 
pollutants 
klys 
kde
respiration
secretion
excretion
export
ks 
kx 
ke 
cell and 
protein 
turnover 
kaut 
lysosome
kdi ff
glycogen 
store
kexo
exocytosed 
waste 
kend 
krec 
klys 
kaut 
kdeg 
kexo 
kres 
ksec 
kexc 
kexp 
kdiff 
rate of endocytosis 
rate of  recycling 
rate of  traffic to lysosome 
rate of autophagy 
rate of degradation 
rate of exocytosis 
rate of cellular respiration 
rate of secretion 
rate of excretion 
rate of export 
rate of diffusion 
6.7×10-17 – 2.0×10-15  litres/sec 
0.0 – 1.65×10-15 litres/sec 
0.0 – 3.5×10-16 litres/sec 
1.7×10-16  – 1.2×10-15 litres/sec 
1.0×10-16 – 1.0×10-15 litres/sec 
1.0×10-16 – 1.0×10-15 litres/sec 
0.0 – 2.0×10-17 litres/sec 
1.4×10-19 – 2.8×10-18 litres/sec 
1.25 ×10-18 – 4.0×10-18 litres/sec 
0.0 – 6.0×10-16 litres/sec 
0.0 – 7.5×10-16 litres/sec 
fig. 1. conceptual model schematic and glossary showing the basic compartmental system and pathways.
summer when the mussel is at its poorest energetic state, there is a period of high food avail-
ability and quality resulting in the rapid increase in dry weight and energy stores; with the
deterioration in food over the autumn and winter the glycogen reserves are initially utilised
until a threshold is met, thereafter protein becomes the main energy reserve. the simulated
total cellular, carbon and protein dry weights all show fairly good accordance with the
trends observed. lipid behaviour has however proved more troublesome: the model has
an inferior degradative ability for lipid in comparison to protein and carbohydrates,
s436
a. mcveigh et al. / marine environmental research 62 (2006) s433–s438
non mantle protein dry weight % of total dry weight
(b)
observed
model
(a)
100%
75%
50%
25%
0%
non mantle dry weight as percentage of control
observed
model
65%
60%
55%
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
jun
jul
jul aug sep oct nov nov dec
jan
feb mar apr apr may
jun
jul
jul aug sep oct nov nov dec
jan feb mar apr apr may
non mantle cabrohydrate dry weight % of total dry weight
(d)
observed
model
(c)
8%
7%
6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
non mantle lipid dry weight % of total dry weight
observed
model
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
jun
jul
jul aug sep oct nov nov dec
jan feb mar apr apr may
jun
jul
jul aug sep oct nov nov dec
jan feb mar apr apr may
(e)
starvation induced autophagy
starvation induced autophagy and phenanthrene toxicity
(f)
exposure
control + food model
recovery period
control + food obs
control - food model
control - food obs
30
25
20
15
10
30
25
20
15
10
exposure
recovery period
phenanthrene - food model
phenanthrene - food obs
phenanthrene + food model
phenanthrene + food obs
10
12
14
16
10
12
14
16
time (days)
time (days)
fig. 2. simulation results compared to observed biochemical and experimental data. (a) seasonal non mantle
tissue dry weight expressed as a percentage of maximum observation. (b–d) dry weight of protein, lipid and
carbohydrate, respectively, expressed as percentage of total cellular dry weight. (e) eﬀects of starvation on
lysosomal stability. – –r– – control + food observed , — – —j— – — control   food observed, — — —
control + food model results, ———– control   food model results (f) eﬀects of starvation coupled with
phenanthrene exposure on lysosomal stability. phenanthrene was dosed at a concentration of 50 lg mus-
sel 1 day 1 as a single daily dose (moore, 2004)., — — d— — phenanthrene + food observed , — – — m— – —
phenanthrene   food observed, ——– phenanthrene + food model results, – – – – phenanthrene – food model
results.
coupled with the dual model constraints on lipid (as both a possible energy source and com-
ponent part of membranes). this has invoked a simulated response whereby total lipid con-
tent does have seasonal variation, but the trend against the rest of the cell is decreasing
monotonically. possibly other parts of the non-mantle contribute to the real data as a form
of lipid store. possible future improvements include changing the lipid content of the nutri-
ents and changing the lipid control functions.
the model was also run to simulate an experiment coupling short-term starvation and
phenanthrene exposure (moore, 2004). phenanthrene and pah treatment of molluscan
digestive cells results in oxidative stress, probably by direct oxidative attack on intra-lyso-
somal pah by oxyradicals normally generated in the lysosomal compartment. such oxi-
a. mcveigh et al. / marine environmental research 62 (2006) s433–s438
s437
dative attack will generate ah-quinones which will result in redox cycling contributing to
oxidative stress (moore, 1990; moore et al., 1985; sjo¨ lin and livingstone, 1997; winston
et al., 1991). it was observed that the starvation-induced autophagy apparently provides a
protective mechanism (indicated by recovery in lysosomal stability) when combined with
toxic exposure. the lysosomal stability output of the model was calculated by a quadratic
function of lysosomal volume density ﬁtted to data. the control ﬂuctuations in the fed
control model correspond to the lysosomal swelling under feeding and its replenishment
over the holding phase. the starved control model shows no perceptible decline in lyso-
somal stability, which matches observation (bayne et al., 1978; moore, 2004). the starved
phenanthrene treated model follows a similar trend to the observed recovery, although the
recovery occurs faster in the model and starts immediately after the exposure period
(moore, 2004). the fed phenanthrene treated model cell shows a continual decline in lyso-
somal stability, rapidly at ﬁrst during xenobiotic exposure; and then more gradually after
exposure has ceased.
possible interpretations for these results reveal that the starvation means the lysosomal
capability is only moderately impaired as the cell volume shrinks; hence the lysosome of
the starved cell has only to deal with autophagocytosed food and toxic eﬀects of phenan-
threne; while the fed cell with only a slightly increased lysosomal capability has to degrade
ingested food and the basal autophagocytosed material as well as the toxicity of phenan-
threne. furthermore, the increased autophagy for the nutrient deprived cell may facilitate
non-speciﬁc detoxiﬁcation of cytosolic phenanthrene at a greater rate than in the fed pah
treated cell. starvation augmented autophagy will remove oxidatively damaged proteins
more eﬀectively from the cytoplasm, while the fed cell will tend to accumulate damaged
proteins leading to molecular and cellular pathology and an increased burden on the
already overstretched lysosome. lipofuscin generation is initially more pronounced in
the starved model but the removal of lipofuscin is possible due to the relatively small
workload of the lysosome by a gross strategy of removal of lysosomal compartment
reﬂecting exocytosis and apocrine secretion or apical pinching-oﬀ of the cytoplasm
(moore, 2004; moore et al., 2006). within the fed cell, lipofuscin generation continues
unabated due to its ﬁrst order kinetics and the lack of opportunity for removal (as the
lysosome is overburdened and in continual demand) resulting in the continual decline in
lysosomal stability.
this simulation has prompted the following possible considerations for the model: (1)
since the integrated physiological function of the cell depends upon the interactions of pro-
teins, an increase in the amount of damaged proteins should lead to a less eﬃcient cell,
hence some cost needs to be added to the model for damaged proteins; (2) and it should
be possible to determine the critical space within the parameter space where recovery
occurs and this should be possible to validate by direct experimentation.
in conclusion, this new model provides a fairly robust simulation of both an annual
cycle and the role of starvation induced autophagy as a protective measure. further work
is required on lipid metabolism and the detrimental eﬀect of the presence of damaged pro-
teins on the functional state of the digestive cell.
acknowledgement
the work forms part of the predict 2 project supported by the department for
environment, food and rural aﬀairs (defra, uk), contract no. ae1136.
s438
a. mcveigh et al. / marine environmental research 62 (2006) s433–s438
references
allen, j.i., mcveigh, a., 2004. towards computational models of cells for environmental toxicology. journal of
molecular histology 35, 697–706.
bayne, b.l., holland, d.l., moore, m.n., lowe, d.m., widdows, j., 1978. further studies on the eﬀects of
stress in the adult on the eggs of mytilus edulis. journal of the marine biological association uk 58, 825–841.
gabbott, p.a., bayne, b.l., 1973. biochemical eﬀects of temperature and nutritive stress on mytilus edulis l..
journal of the marine biological association uk 53, 269–286.
langton, r.w., 1975. synchrony in the digestive diverticula of mytilus edulis l. journal of the marine biological
association uk 55, 221–229.
mcveigh, a., allen, j.i., moore, m.n., dyke, p., noble, d., 2004. a carbon and nitrogen ﬂux model of mussel
digestive gland epithelial cells and their simulated response to pollutants. marine environmental research 58,
821–827.
moore, m.n., 1990. lysosomal cytochemistry in marine environmental monitoring. histochemical journal 22,
187–191.
moore, m.n., 2004. diet restriction induced autophagy: a lysosomal protective system against oxidative- and
pollutant-stress and cell injury. marine environmental research 58, 603–607.
moore, m.n., allen, j.i., 2002. a computational model of the digestive gland epithelial cell of the marine mussel
and its simulated responses to aromatic hydrocarbons. marine environmental research 54, 579–584.
moore, m.n., allen, j.i., mcveigh, 2006. environmental prognostics: an integrated model supporting lysosomal
stress responses as predictive biomarkers of animal health status. marine environmental research 61, 278–
304.
moore, m.n., mayernick, j.a., giam, c.s., 1985. lysosomal responses to a polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbon
in a marine snail: eﬀects of exposure to phenanthrene and recovery. marine environmental research 17, 230–
233.
sjo¨lin, a.m., livingstone, d.r., 1997. redox cycling of aromatic hydrocarbon quinones catalysed by digestive
gland microsomes of the common mussel (mytilus edulis l.). aquatic toxicology 38, 83–99.
winston, g.w., moore, m.n., straatsburg, i., kirchin, m., 1991. lysosomal stability in mytilus edulis l.:
potential as a biomarker of oxidative stress related to environmental contamination. archives of
environmental contamination and toxicology 21, 401–408.