immunity
article
antigen-loading compartments for major
histocompatibility complex class ii molecules
continuously receive input from autophagosomes
dorothee schmid,1 marc pypaert,2 and christian mu¨ nz1,*
1 laboratory of viral immunobiology and christopher h. browne center for immunology and immune diseases,
the rockefeller university, new york, ny 10021, usa
2 department of cell biology, yale university school of medicine, new haven, ct 06520, usa
*correspondence: munzc@rockefeller.edu
doi 10.1016/j.immuni.2006.10.018
summary
major histocompatibility complex (mhc) class ii
molecules present products of lysosomal pro-
teolysis to cd4+ t cells. although extracellular
antigen uptake is considered to be the main
source of mhc class ii ligands, a few intracellu-
lar antigens have been described to gain ac-
cess to mhc class ii loading after macroau-
tophagy. however, the general relevance and
efﬁcacy of this pathway is unknown. here we
demonstrated constitutive autophagosome for-
mation in mhc class ii-positive cells, including
dendritic, b, and epithelial cells. the autopha-
gosomes continuously fuse with multivesicular
mhc class ii-loading compartments. this path-
way was of
relevance, because
targeting of the inﬂuenza matrix protein 1 to
autophagosomes via fusion to the autophago-
some-associated protein atg8/lc3 led to
strongly enhanced mhc class ii presentation
to cd4+ t cell clones. we suggest that macro-
autophagy constitutively and efﬁciently delivers
cytosolic proteins for mhc class ii presentation
and can be harnessed for improved helper t cell
stimulation.
functional
introduction
the t cells of the adaptive immune system monitor all
body cells for the presence of pathogenic proteins. for
this purpose, peptides generated by the proteasome are
presented on mhc class i molecules and are recognized
by cd8+ t cells, whereas products of lysosomal degrada-
tion are presented on mhc class ii molecules and are rec-
ognized by cd4+ t cells (bryant and ploegh, 2004; cress-
well et al., 2005; trombetta and mellman, 2005). antigens
presented on mhc class ii are typically exogenous pro-
teins that are endocytosed by the antigen-presenting
cell (apc) or endogenous proteins that reside in the secre-
tory system. however, analysis of peptides eluted from
mhc class ii molecules has revealed that a substantial
proportion of natural mhc class ii ligands (up to 20%)
are derived from cytosolic and nuclear proteins (chicz
et al., 1993; dengjel et al., 2005; dongre et al., 2001;
friede et al., 1996; muntasell et al., 2004). furthermore,
it was shown that cd4+ t cells can recognize cytosolic
and nuclear antigens after endogenous processing. this
pathway for cd4+ t cell recognition was ﬁrst described
by long and colleagues, who showed that cytosolic mea-
sles virus and inﬂuenza a virus antigens can be endoge-
nously processed for mhc class ii presentation (gueguen
and long, 1996; jacobson et al., 1989; jaraquemada
et al., 1990). subsequently, endogenous mhc class ii pre-
sentation has been described for other viral antigens (chen
et al., 1998; paludan et al., 2005), self antigens (brazil et al.,
1997; lich et al., 2000), and model antigens (nimmerjahn
et al., 2003; qi et al., 2000), as well as tumor antigens
(do¨ rfel et al., 2005; zeng et al., 2001). therefore, antigens
that are topologically isolated from the endosomal system
can gain access to the mhc class ii antigen-presenta-
tion pathway and broaden the repertoire of mhc class ii
ligands.
different processing pathways have been discussed to
contribute to endogenous mhc class ii antigen presenta-
tion (reviewed in lechler et al., 1996; schmid and mu¨ nz,
2005). recently, macroautophagy was shown to deliver
cytosolic and nuclear antigens onto mhc class ii mole-
cules (brazil et al., 1997; dengjel et al., 2005; do¨ rfel
et al., 2005; nimmerjahn et al., 2003; paludan et al.,
2005; zhou et al., 2005). of these, the epstein-barr virus
(ebv) nuclear antigen 1 (ebna1) was the ﬁrst pathogen-
derived antigen that was found to be presented on mhc
class ii molecules of ebv-transformed b cell lines after
macroautophagic degradation (paludan et al., 2005).
autophagy consists of at least three intracellular protein-
degradation pathways found ubiquitously in eukaryotic
cells, chaperone-mediated autophagy, microautophagy,
and macroautophagy (shintani and klionsky, 2004). both
chaperone-mediated autophagy and macroautophagy
have been implicated in mhc class ii presentation of cyto-
solic and nuclear antigens (reviewed in deretic, 2006).
during chaperone-mediated autophagy, lysosome-asso-
ciated membrane protein 2a (lamp-2a) with the assis-
tance of one cytosolic and one lysosomal heat shock
immunity 26, 79–92, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc. 79
macroautophagy in mhc class ii antigen processing
immunity
more autophagosomes that are formed, the more lc3 is
degraded in autolysosomes, and therefore,
lysosomal
turnover of lc3 is a good measure for macroautophagic
activity (tanida et al., 2005).
to visualize the lysosomal turnover of lc3 in human ep-
ithelial cells by ﬂuorescence microscopy, we transfected
cell lines derived from different organs (hacat from skin,
hela from cervix, mdamc from breast, 293 from kidney)
with a gfp-lc3 fusion construct. gfp-lc3 reporter con-
structs have been used previously to visualize autophago-
somes in transgenic mice and cultured cells (mizushima,
2005), and it has been shown that overexpression of
gfp-lc3 does not alter the macroautophagic activity
(mizushima et al., 2004, and our unpublished data).
gfp-lc3-transfected cell lines were treated with the lyso-
somal acidiﬁcation inhibitor chloroquine (cq) to block
lysosomal proteolysis and thereby visualize the accumula-
tion of gfp-lc3 in autolysosomes. in the steady state (no
cq), most cells had only a few gfp-lc3-labeled autopha-
gosomes (typically 0–5), and only a small fraction of cells
had >10 gfp-lc3-positive vesicles (figure 1a, left). how-
ever, in all cell lines examined, gfp-lc3 strongly accumu-
lated in cytosolic vesicles after 10 hr of cq treatment
(figure 1a, right), suggesting that large numbers of gfp-
lc3-labeled autophagosomes had formed and fused
with lysosomes during the 10 hr observation period. the
accumulation of brightly gfp-lc3-labeled vesicles could
already be observed 2 hr after cq treatment
(see
figure s1a in the supplemental data available online), in
good agreement with the rapid degradation kinetics of
these vesicles. the accumulation of gfp-lc3+ vesicles
upon cq treatment was dependent on macroautophagy,
because sirna-mediated knockdown of atg12, a gene
essential for autophagosome formation (yorimitsu and
klionsky, 2005), completely abrogates accumulation of
these vesicles (figure 1b).
to extend our results with gfp-lc3 to endogenous
lc3, we took advantage of the fact that autophago-
some-associated lc3 (called lc3-ii) and free cytosolic
lc3 (called lc3-i) can be distinguished by their apparent
molecular weights in sds-page gel electrophoresis (16
and 18 kda, respectively) and thus can be quantiﬁed sep-
arately in anti-lc3 immunoblots (kabeya et al., 2000). the
same four epithelial cell lines were cultured in the pres-
ence or absence of the lysosomal protease inhibitor cq
for 10 hr, and accumulation of lc3-ii was quantiﬁed by im-
munoblotting. in all cell lines, autophagosome-associated
lc3-ii strongly accumulated upon cq treatment (fig-
ure 1c), demonstrating that lc3-ii-labeled autophago-
somes were constitutively degraded in endosomes and/or
lysosomes over the course of 10 hr. as shown in figure 1d
for the hacat cell line, cellular lc3-ii levels were already
increased 1 hr after cq treatment and gradually accumu-
lated after longer treatment times, conﬁrming that auto-
phagosomes are being produced continuously. density
quantiﬁcation of immunoblots revealed that lc3-ii accu-
mulated 5-fold (hacat and mdamc), 15-fold (hela), and
30-fold (293) after 10 hr of cq treatment (data not shown).
lc3-ii accumulated to similar amounts when cells were
protein 70 family member imports cytosolic substrates in
a signal peptide-dependent fashion directly into lyso-
somes (majeski and dice, 2004). in contrast, during mac-
roautophagy, cytoplasmic material, including organelles
and protein aggregates, is sequestered into double mem-
brane-coated autophagosomes, which subsequently fuse
with endosomes and lysosomes to form so-called amphi-
somes or autolysosomes (yorimitsu and klionsky, 2005).
in these fusion compartments, the sequestered contents
of autophagosomes are then broken down by lysosomal
hydrolases, and the degradation products are recycled
by the cell.
so far, mhc class ii presentation to cd4+ t cells after
macroautophagic degradation has been described for
only one model antigen (neomycin phosphotransferase
ii) (nimmerjahn et al., 2003), one self antigen (complement
c5) (brazil et al., 1997), one tumor antigen (muc-1) (do¨ rfel
et al., 2005), and one viral antigen (ebna1) (paludan et al.,
2005). therefore, we wondered whether macroautophagy
is a general and efﬁcient pathway for mhc class ii presen-
tation of intracellular antigens in a variety of antigen-pre-
senting cells. in order to address this question, we quan-
tiﬁed macroautophagy in mhc class ii-positive human
cells, analyzed the overlap of autophagosomes with
mhc class ii-loading compartments, and tested whether
targeting of antigens for macroautophagic degradation
leads to enhanced mhc class ii presentation. here we
showed that macroautophagy was a constitutively active
pathway in all mhc class ii-positive cells, including den-
dritic, b, and epithelial cells. furthermore, we showed
that mhc class ii compartments continuously received in-
put from the cytoplasm via macroautophagy and, accord-
ingly, the targeting of antigens to autophagosomes led to
enhanced mhc class ii presentation and thus cd4+ t cell
stimulation.
results
autophagosomes are constitutively turned over by
lysosomal proteases in human epithelial cell lines
to test whether mhc class ii-positive human cells exhibit
constitutive macroautophagy, we ﬁrst quantiﬁed the
amount of macroautophagy in human epithelial cell lines.
epithelial cells readily upregulate mhc class ii molecules
in response to inﬂammatory cytokines both in vitro and
in vivo (reith and mach, 2001). because they have only
limited endocytic potential, we wondered whether these
cell
lines might rely on endogenous degradation path-
ways, such as macroautophagy, to generate peptide
ligands for their mhc class ii molecules. to quantify mac-
roautophagy, we made use of the speciﬁc autophago-
some marker autophagy-related gene 8 (atg8), also called
light chain 3 (lc3). lc3 is an ubiquitin-like protein that is
covalently coupled via its c terminus to a phospholipid
in the newly forming inner and outer autophagosomal
membranes and thus is speciﬁcally incorporated into au-
tophagosomes (kabeya et al., 2000). after fusion of auto-
phagosomes with endosomes or lysosomes, intraluminal
lc3 is rapidly degraded by lysosomal proteases. the
80 immunity 26, 79–92, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc.
immunity
macroautophagy in mhc class ii antigen processing
figure 1. constitutive autophagosome formation in human epithelial cell lines under nutrient-rich conditions
(a) human epithelial cell lines hacat (keratinocyte), hela (cervical carcinoma), mdamc (breast carcinoma), and 293 (kidney) were stably transfected
with a gfp-lc3 reporter construct. to assess turnover of gfp-lc3 in endosomal and lysosomal compartments, cells were treated with 50 mm chlo-
roquine for 10 hr (+cq) or were left untreated (no cq). cells were ﬁxed, stained with dapi nucleic acid stain, and analyzed by confocal microscopy.
scale bars represent 20 mm. representative ﬁelds from one experiment out of three are shown.
(b) mdamc cells stably expressing gfp-lc3 were either mock transfected or transfected with sirna duplexes speciﬁc for lamin a/c or atg12. after
2 days, cells were treated with 50 mm cq for 6 hr (+cq) or were left untreated (no cq), stained with dapi, and examined in an epiﬂuorescence mi-
croscope. one of two experiments is shown.
(c) human epithelial cell lines (hacat, hela, mdamc, and 293) were treated for 10 hr with 50 mm cq (+) or were left untreated (–). whole-cell lysates
were run on a 12% sds-page gel, and lc3-i and -ii were visualized by anti-lc3 immunoblots. actin blots show general protein amounts. one of
three experiments is shown.
(d) hacat cells were treated with 50 mm cq for 0, 1, 2, 10, or 24 hr, and gradual accumulation of lc3-ii was visualized by anti-lc3 immunoblot. anti-
actin blot controls for sample loading. one of two experiments is shown.
treated with inhibitors of lysosomal cathepsins for 10 hr
(figure s1b). taken together, these experiments conﬁrm
that macroautophagy is a constitutively active process in
all human epithelial cell lines analyzed. although macroau-
tophagy can be associated with nutritional deprivation
(codogno and meijer, 2005), the gradual accumulation
of lc3 demonstrates that autophagosomes continuously
deliver lc3 for lysosomal degradation, i.e., that macroau-
tophagy is constitutively active in human epithelial cell
lines under nutrient-rich conditions.
macroautophagy is a constitutively active process
in professional antigen-presenting cells
next, we sought to analyze the macroautophagy activity
of professional antigen-presenting cells (apcs) that are
constitutively mhc class ii positive, such as b cells and
dendritic cells. dendritic cells (dcs) are the most efﬁcient
professional apcs and exist in two functionally and phe-
notypically distinct states, immature and mature (mellman
and steinman, 2001). immature dcs continuously circu-
late through tissues and lymphoid organs to present anti-
gens to t cells for tolerance induction (steinman et al.,
2003). in contrast, mature dcs have an exceptional ca-
pacity to initiate adaptive and innate immune responses.
given the crucial role of dcs in both tolerance and immu-
nity, we were wondering whether macroautophagy might
contribute to mhc class ii presentation in these cells.
to quantify macroautophagy in human b cells and den-
dritic cells, we visualized the turnover of lentivirally deliv-
ered gfp-lc3 in ebv-transformed b lymphoblastoid
immunity 26, 79–92, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc. 81
macroautophagy in mhc class ii antigen processing
immunity
figure 2. macroautophagy is a constitutive process in professional antigen-presenting cells, including dendritic cells
(a) to assess lysosomal turnover of gfp-lc3 in professional apcs, an ebv-transformed b lymphocyte cell line (b-lcl) stably expressing gfp-lc3
and gfp-lc3-expressing immature and mature dcs (idc and mdc) were treated with 50 mm chloroquine for 10 hr (+cq) or were left untreated (no
cq). cells were ﬁxed, stained with dapi, and analyzed by confocal microscopy. scale bars represent 20 mm. representative ﬁelds from one exper-
iment out of two are shown.
(b and c) human b cell lines (ms-lcl [ebv-transformed b lymphocyte cell line], rpmi6666, and l591 [hodgkin’s lymphoma cell lines]) (b), cd14+
monocytes (mono), immature dcs (idc), and lps-matured dcs (mdc) (c) were treated for 10 hr with 50 mm cq (+) or were left untreated (–). whole-
cell lysates were run on 12% sds-page gels, and lc3-i and -ii were visualized by anti-lc3 immunoblotting. actin blots show that cq treatment did
not affect general protein levels. one of three experiments is shown.
cell
lines (lcl) and in monocyte-derived immature and
mature dcs. in all three cell types, gfp-lc3-labeled auto-
phagosomes strongly accumulated after treatment with
cq for 10 hr (figure 2a), indicating constitutive autopha-
gosome turnover. although lcl only contained up to 10
autophagosomes after cq exposure, as previously ob-
served (paludan et al., 2005), immature dcs accumulated
up to 100 gfp-lc3+ vesicles, similar to epithelial cell lines.
furthermore, lc3 immunoblots conﬁrmed that endoge-
nous lc3 was continuously degraded by lysosomal prote-
ases in human b cell lines (figure 2b), in freshly isolated
cd14+ monocytes, as well as in monocyte-derived imma-
ture and mature dendritic cells (figure 2c). these experi-
ments demonstrated that macroautophagy is a steady-
state process not only in epithelial cells, which present
antigens on mhc class ii only upon immune activation,
but also in professional apcs. furthermore, constitutive
macroautophagy is not restricted to transformed human
cell lines, but is also a feature of primary human cells, as
demonstrated for primary monocytes and dendritic cells.
gfp-lc3 colocalizes with markers of mhc
class ii-loading compartments in ifn-g-treated
human epithelial cell lines
to test whether autophagosomes fuse with mhc class ii-
loading compartments (miics), we examined by confocal
82 immunity 26, 79–92, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc.
microscopy whether the autophagosome marker gfp-
lc3 would colocalize with markers of miics. miics have
been characterized as conventional late endosomal com-
partments that in addition to late endosomal and lyso-
somal markers, such as lamp-1 and -2, contain the com-
ponents for mhc class ii loading, namely mhc class ii and
the peptide-loading chaperone hla-dm (trombetta and
mellman, 2005).
we initially focused our analysis on epithelial cells, be-
cause they might rely heavily on endogenous mhc class
ii antigen processing (because of their limited endocytic
potential) compared to classical apcs like dcs. we con-
ﬁrmed that most of our human epithelial cell lines, with
the exception of 293 cells, expressed mhc class ii mole-
cules after ifn-g treatment (data not shown). in the human
cell lines used in this study, ifn-g treatment did not lead to
a detectable upregulation of macroautophagy, as deter-
mined by immunoblot (figure s2), although we cannot
exclude that the ifn-g treatment slightly inﬂuenced the
macroautophagy activity, in addition to inducing mhc
class ii-positive compartments. for colocalization analy-
sis, cells were treated with ifn-g, transiently transfected
with the gfp-lc3 reporter construct, and stained with an-
tibodies speciﬁc for the miic markers mhc class ii, hla-
dm, and lamp-2 in mdamc (figure 3a) and hacat cells
(data not shown). mhc class ii-positive compartments
immunity
macroautophagy in mhc class ii antigen processing
figure 3. the autophagosome marker gfp-lc3 colocalizes with markers of mhc class ii-loading compartments in human
epithelial cell lines and dendritic cells
(a) mdamc cells were treated with 200 u/ml ifn-g, transiently transfected with a gfp-lc3 reporter construct, and 48 hr later stained with antibodies
to mhc class ii, hla-dm, lamp-2, and dapi for dna content. colocalization of gfp-lc3 with miic markers was analyzed by confocal microscopy.
scale bars represent 10 mm. representative cells from one experiment out of three are shown.
(b) same as (a), except that 50 mm chloroquine (cq) was present during the last 10 hr of the culture. scale bars represent 10 mm. representative cells
from one experiment out of three are shown.
(c) colocalization of gfp-lc3 and mhc class ii molecules in electron-dense multivesicular compartments. untreated (i and ii) or cq-treated (iii and
iv) mdamc cells stably expressing gfp-lc3 and mhc class ii-positive because of ifn-g induction were ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde and cut into
80 nm-thin cryosections. sections were labeled with an hla-dr-speciﬁc antiserum, and 10 nm protein a-gold (pag10) and antibody-pag com-
plexes were irreversibly ﬁxed with glutaraldehyde. subsequently, sections were labeled with a gfp-speciﬁc antibody and 15 nm protein a-gold
(pag15) and were analyzed by electron microscopy. as a control, pag10 and pag15 were interchanged and were shown to produce the same la-
beling pattern (i/ii versus iii/iv). insets from panels i and iii are shown at higher magniﬁcation in panels ii and iv, respectively. representative ﬁelds
from one experiment out of three are shown.
frequently colocalized with gfp-lc3 (figure 3a). when
we quantiﬁed colocalization of mhc class ii and hla-
dm with gfp-lc3 by using the lsm510 software’s proﬁle
tool, which overlays the intensity proﬁles along a cross-
section through a cell, we found that in double-positive
cells, 58% (±10%) of mhc class ii+ and 52% (±20%) of
hla-dm+ compartments contained gfp-lc3.
to assess the proportion of miics that showed no co-
localization with gfp-lc3 because of degradation of the
autophagosome marker protein, we performed the same
experiments on cq-treated mdamc and hacat cells. co-
localization of gfp-lc3 with mhc class ii, hla-dm, and
lamp-2 was more pronounced under these conditions
(figure 3b and data for hacat not shown). colocalization
analysis with the lsm 510 proﬁle tool showed that after
cq treatment, colocalization increased to 86% (±9%) for
mhc class ii+ and to 71% (±12%) for hla-dm+ vesicles.
this demonstrates that the majority of mhc class ii-load-
ing compartments obtain input from autophagosomes in
human epithelial cell lines.
gfp-lc3 and mhc class ii colocalize
in electron-dense multivesicular compartments
to identify gfp-lc3 and mhc class ii double-positive
compartments by electron microscopy, we prepared
ultrathin cryosections of untreated or cq-treated, stably
immunity 26, 79–92, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc. 83
macroautophagy in mhc class ii antigen processing
immunity
figure 4. gfp-lc3 is degraded in mhc class ii-loading
compartments of dendritic cells
(a) gfp-lc3-expressing immature dcs were treated with 50 mm chlo-
roquine for 10 hr (+cq). cells were stained with an mhc class ii-spe-
ciﬁc antibody, and dapi and colocalization of gfp-lc3 with mhc
class ii was analyzed by confocal microscopy. scale bar represents
10 mm. representative cells from one experiment out of three are
shown.
(b) same experiment as in (a) was performed with mature dcs. in the
majority of mature dcs, mhc class ii was mainly localized at the cell
surface, but a subset of cells had intracellular mhc class ii compart-
ments (white arrow). scale bar represents 10 mm. representative cells
from one experiment out of three are shown.
gfp-lc3 minimally colocalizes with markers
of early endosomes or mhc class i-loading
compartments
to determine whether autophagosomes selectively fuse
with miics, we analyzed the overlap of gfp-lc3 with
markers of other endocytic compartments, speciﬁcally
early endosomes (positive for early endosomal antigen,
eea1) and recycling endosomes (positive for transferrin
receptor, tr). for the mdamc cell
line, gfp-lc3 did
not show a pronounced overlap with either eea1 or trans-
ferrin receptor, even in the presence of chloroquine (fig-
ure 5a). when we quantiﬁed colocalization of eea1 with
gfp-lc3, colocalization was low in untreated mdamc
cells (9%), but slightly increased after chloroquine treat-
ment (to 26%) (figure 5b). the difference between gfp-
lc3 colocalization with mhc class ii or hla-dm versus
eea1 was statistically signiﬁcant in the presence and ab-
sence of cq (p < 0.001) (figure 5b). in hacat cells, the
overlap of gfp-lc3 with eea1 or transferrin receptor
was also minimal (data not shown). furthermore, in ifn-
g-treated cells, gfp-lc3 rarely entered early or recycling
endosomes (data not shown).
macroautophagy has been implicated in the presenta-
tion of intracellular antigens on mhc class ii, but does
not seem to inﬂuence mhc class i presentation (nimmer-
jahn et al., 2003; paludan et al., 2005). to further address
this issue, we analyzed the overlap of gfp-lc3 with mhc
class i molecules. as expected, mhc class i was mainly
found in perinuclear er and golgi regions and on the
plasma membrane and did not colocalize with the
more peripherally distributed gfp-lc3-positive vesicles
gfp-lc3 transfected mdamc cells, stained them with
antibodies speciﬁc for hla-dr and gfp, and applied an-
tibodies labeled with 10 and 15 nm protein a-gold parti-
cles. in both untreated and cq-treated cells, the two anti-
bodies strongly labeled large (1–2 mm), electron-dense,
multivesicular compartments (figure 3c). other organ-
elles, such as nuclei and mitochondria, were mostly gold
negative; however, some gfp-lc3 staining was observed
in the cytosol, and mhc class ii staining could be seen on
the er, on the golgi, and at the cell membrane (fig-
ure s3a). the morphology of the double-labeled compart-
ments was very similar in untreated and cq-treated cells,
but they were found much more frequently in cq-treated
cells (data not shown), and some of them displayed the
characteristic swollen phenotype of lysosomal compart-
ments under chloroquine treatment (figure s3b). at higher
magniﬁcation, the presence of electron-dense material,
numerous small vesicles, and sometimes larger lipid
membranes became apparent (figure 3c, panels ii and
iv). both gfp-lc3 and mhc class ii molecules were often
found in close proximity to each other on intraluminal lipid
membranes. this suggests that autophagosomes fre-
quently fuse with mhc class ii compartments, giving rise
to multivesicular compartments that contain both mhc
class ii molecules and lc3 on internal membranes.
gfp-lc3 is degraded in mhc class ii-loading
compartments of dendritic cells
after having observed an overlap of autophagosomes with
mhc class ii-loading compartments in human epithelial
cell lines, we wondered whether we could observe the
same colocalization in professional apcs, most notably
dendritic cells. to address this question, we transfected
cd14+ monocytes with a lentiviral gfp-lc3 reporter con-
struct, generated immature and mature dcs, and stained
them with an mhc class ii-speciﬁc antibody. because
dcs are constitutively mhc class ii-positive, no ifn-g
treatment was necessary for these experiments.
mhc class ii compartments of immature dcs frequently
contained the autophagosome marker gfp-lc3 after 10
hr of cq treatment (figure 4a). colocalization analysis
showed that 41% (±7%) of mhc class ii-labeled compart-
ments were positive for gfp-lc3. in the majority of ma-
ture dcs, mhc class ii molecules were mainly localized
at the cell surface (figure 4b) and therefore the overlap
with autophagosomes was minimal. however, in a subset
of cells that still had some intravesicular mhc class ii
staining, gfp-lc3 was frequently localized within these
miics after cq treatment (figure 4b, white arrow). in the
absence of
the lysosomal acidiﬁcation inhibitor cq,
gfp-lc3 was mainly present in the cytosol and only
very few gfp-lc3+ vesicles could be observed in both im-
mature and mature dcs (see figure 2a). therefore, no co-
localization analysis could be performed for untreated
dcs. however, the accumulation of gfp-lc3 in miics of
cq-treated immature and mature dcs showed that auto-
phagosomes feed into the mhc class ii pathway not only
in epithelial cell lines but also in professional apcs, namely
dendritic cells.
84 immunity 26, 79–92, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc.
immunity
macroautophagy in mhc class ii antigen processing
figure 5. gfp-lc3 minimally colocalizes with markers of
early endosomes or mhc class i-loading compartments
(a) mdamc cells were transiently transfected with a gfp-lc3 reporter
construct and 36 hr later treated with 50 mm chloroquine for 10 hr. cells
were stained with antibodies to early endosomal antigen (eea1) or
transferrin receptor (tr) and dapi and analyzed by confocal micros-
copy. scale bars represent 10 mm. representative cells from one ex-
periment out of two are shown.
(b) quantitative analysis for colocalization of gfp-lc3 with mhc class
ii, hla-dm, and eea1 in untreated or cq-treated mdamc cells. data
represent means from 10-15 cells from one representative experiment
out of two. error bars indicate standard deviations. p values from ho-
mocedastic, one-tailed student’s t test statistics are shown.
(c) as in (a), except that cells were stained with an mhc class i-spe-
ciﬁc antibody.
(figure 5c). together, our data suggest that autophago-
somes mainly fuse with miics in mhc class ii-positive
cells, but only rarely with early and recycling endosomes
or mhc class i-loading compartments.
cytosolic and nuclear antigens can be targeted
for macroautophagic degradation by fusion to lc3
the observation that autophagosomes continuously fuse
with mhc class ii-loading compartments suggests that
this pathway might deliver cytosolic antigens efﬁciently
for mhc class ii presentation to cd4+ t cells. to test
this hypothesis, we investigated whether the targeting of
a cytosolic antigen for macroautophagy would lead to en-
hanced cd4+ t cell recognition. for this purpose, we gen-
erated a fusion construct of the inﬂuenza matrix protein 1
(mp1) with the autophagosome marker protein lc3, rea-
soning that the lc3 portion of such a fusion protein should
target the antigen to macroautophagic membranes and
subsequent degradation in miics. we then stably ex-
pressed the mp1-lc3 fusion protein or the mp1 wild-
type protein (figure s4a) in the human epithelial cell lines
hacat and mdamc. immunoblot analysis showed that
the antigens were expressed in both cell lines and had
the expected molecular weights (mp1, 28 kda; mp1-
lc3, 43 kda) (figure s4b). notably, the mp1-lc3 fusion
protein was present at slightly lower amounts than mp1
in both cell lines. in order to test whether the fusion protein
would indeed localize to autophagosomes, we coex-
pressed gfp-lc3 and the mp1 constructs in mdamc
cells (figure s4c) and hacat cells (data not shown) and
analyzed their colocalization by confocal microscopy. as
expected, wild-type mp1 was homogenously distributed
in the cytosol and nucleus, and this pattern did not change
after cq treatment (figure s4c, top rows). in contrast, the
mp1-lc3 fusion protein showed punctate cytosolic stain-
ing, which overlapped with gfp-lc3-positive autophago-
somes (figure s4c, bottom rows). furthermore, after cq
treatment for 10 hr, gfp-lc3 and mp1-lc3 accumulated
in the same cytosolic vesicles, demonstrating that the lc3
tag indeed targets the inﬂuenza matrix protein 1 to auto-
phagosomes for subsequent degradation by lysosomal
proteases.
targeting of antigens for macroautophagic
degradation leads to enhanced cd4+ t cell
recognition
to test the hypothesis that targeting of cytosolic and nu-
clear antigens for macroautophagic degradation via lc3
fusion leads to enhanced mhc class ii presentation, we
analyzed the recognition of mp1- versus mp1-lc3-
expressing target cells by mp1-speciﬁc cd4+ t cell
clones. for this purpose, we generated mp1-speciﬁc
cd4+ t cell clones (figure s5) from a healthy lab donor
who was hla-dr and -dq matched to the hacat cell
line, so that ifn-g-treated hacat cells could be used as
target cells. to analyze the effect of the lc3 fusion on
mhc class i presentation, we also generated an hla-
a2-restricted cd8+ t cell clone from the same donor
(figure s5), which then could be tested for recognition of
hla-a2-positive mdamc target cells. furthermore, autol-
ogous ebv-transformed b-lcls and monocyte-derived
dcs from the same donor could be used as target cells
for both cd4+ and cd8+ t cell clones.
immunity 26, 79–92, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc. 85
macroautophagy in mhc class ii antigen processing
immunity
figure 6. fusion of mp1 to lc3 enhances cd4+ t cell recognition, while leaving cd8+ t cell recognition unaffected
(a) mp1-speciﬁc cd4+ t cell clones 9.26, 10.9, and 11.46 were stimulated at various effector to target cell (et) ratios with different mp1- or mp1-lc3-
expressing target cells: hacat cells (ifn-g-treated to induce mhc class ii), cm-lcl, or immature/mature dcs. the next day, ifn-g in culture super-
natants was measured by elisa to assess mhc class ii presentation of mp1. as a positive control, target cells were pulsed with cognate peptide
(+pept.) and as negative controls, untransfected and gfp-lc3-transfected target cells were used. error bars indicate standard deviations and p
values for paired, one-tailed student’s t test statistics across all e:t ratios are shown. for each target cell type, one representative clone out of three
is shown (hacat, 10.9; cm-lcl, 11.46; dcs, 9.26), and the experiments were performed twice.
(b) as in (a), but mp1-speciﬁc cd8+ t cell clone 9.2 was used for all experiments. target cells were mp1- or mp1-lc3-expressing mdamc cells (ifn-
g-treated or untreated), cm-lcl, immature or mature dcs. error bars indicate standard deviations. one of two experiments is shown.
to assess how well the two different forms of mp1 could
be presented on mhc class ii, we measured ifn-g secre-
tion of three mp1-speciﬁc cd4+ t cell clones in response
to mp1- or mp1-lc3-expressing target cells (hacat epi-
thelial cells, b-lcls, or dcs). the response of the cd4+
t cell clones (clone 9.26, 10.9, and 11.46) was strongly in-
creased by the lc3 fusion (figure 6a). this effect was
seen for all types of target cells, epithelial, b, and dcs. al-
though at the lowest ratio of t cell clone to cellular targets
(effector to target or e:t ratio), mp1-lc3 typically elicited
only 2- to 4-fold higher ifn-g production, the difference in
ifn-g secretion was especially pronounced at higher e:t
86 immunity 26, 79–92, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc.
immunity
macroautophagy in mhc class ii antigen processing
ratios, when the target cells and thus mhc class ii-peptide
complexes became limiting. at these e:t ratios, ifn-g se-
cretion by the cd4+ t cell clones in response to mp1-lc3
compared to mp1 was increased 12- to 17-fold for hacat
epithelial targets, 4- to 8-fold for b-lcl targets, 5- to 17-
fold for immature dcs, and 7- to 20-fold for mature dcs.
untransfected and gfp-lc3-transfected target cells
were not recognized above background (figure 6a). al-
though the ifn-g response to mp1 transfectants of the
hacat cell line never exceeded 30% of the amount se-
creted upon recognition of the peptide-pulsed hacat-
positive control, mp1-lc3 transfectants were able to
stimulate up to 95% of the maximal cd4+ t cell recogni-
tion achieved with peptide-pulsed targets. mixing experi-
ments demonstrated that mhc class ii presentation of
mp1 and mp1-lc3 was indeed due to endogenous pro-
cessing, because the mixing of hla-matched hacat cells
with mismatched mp1- or mp1-lc3-expressing mdamc
cells did not stimulate any t cell responses (figure 6a,
top). furthermore, when mhc class ii was not induced
on hacat cells by ifn-g, mp1- and mp1-lc3-expresssing
cells were unable to stimulate cd4+ t cell responses
(figure 6a, top), conﬁrming that the presentation was
mhc class ii restricted. in addition, mhc class ii surface
staining showed that equal mhc class ii surface levels
were present on all mp1- and mp1-lc3-expressing target
cells (data not shown), demonstrating that the enhanced
recognition of mp1-lc3 was not due to enhanced mhc
class ii expression.
to assess the effect of the lc3 fusion on mhc class i
presentation, we analyzed the ifn-g response of an
mp1-speciﬁc cd8+ t cell clone to mp1- and mp1-lc3-
expressing target cells (mdamc epithelial cells, b-lcls,
or dcs). for all types of target cells and across all e:t ra-
tios, similar amounts of ifn-g were secreted by cd8+ t
cells in response to mp1- and mp1-lc3-expressing tar-
gets (figure 6b). this suggests that the lc3 fusion does
not impair mhc class i presentation and that both con-
structs give rise to similar amounts of defective ribosomal
products (drips), which are then efﬁciently processed for
cd8+ t cell recognition (yewdell et al., 2003). this was ob-
served for both ifn-g-treated mdamc target cells and un-
treated mdamc cells, although mhc class i presentation
seemed to be slightly enhanced by the ifn-g treatment,
which is consistent with an enhanced mhc class i-pro-
cessing machinery (trombetta and mellman, 2005). taken
together, our data suggest that targeting of cytosolic and
nuclear antigens for macroautophagic degradation via
lc3 fusion can strongly increase cd4+ t cell recognition,
without impairing cd8+ t cell recognition.
autophagosome targeting depends on the
molecular machinery of macroautophagy
in order to determine whether coupling to the autophago-
somal membrane was crucial for antigen targeting to en-
hance mhc class ii presentation, we mutated the amino
acid glycine 120 of lc3 to alanine in our fusion construct
(mp1-lc3(g120a)). mp1-lc3(g120a) failed to localize
to gfp-lc3+ autophagosomes (figure 7a) and was not
preferentially targeted for mhc class ii presentation. inﬂu-
enza mp1-speciﬁc cd4+ t cell recognition of mp1-
lc3(g120a) was similar to mp1 after transfection into ha-
cat cells (figure 7b). all constructs were expressed to
similar amounts in hacat and mdamc cells (data not
shown) and elicited comparable inﬂuenza mp1-speciﬁc
cd8+ t cell stimulation (figure 7b). these data suggest
that the ubiquitin-like conjugation of lc3 to the autopha-
gosomal membrane is crucial for lc3-mediated targeting
to enhance mhc class ii presentation.
to further conﬁrm that macroautophagy is required for
targeting of lc3 fusion antigens to mhc class ii-loading
compartments, we analyzed colocalization of mp1-lc3
with mhc class ii with and without atg12-speciﬁc rna
interference (figure s6). in cells transfected with control
sirna, mp1-lc3 colocalized substantially with mhc
class ii in cytosolic vesicles of ifn-g-treated mdamc
cells. in contrast, in cells transfected with atg12-speciﬁc
sirna, mp1-lc3 was diffusely distributed and did not co-
localize with punctate mhc class ii compartments any
more. these experiments suggest that lc3 fusion anti-
gens enter mhc class ii-loading compartments primarily
via macroautophagy.
taken together, the two ubiquitin-like conjugation sys-
tems, lc3-lipid and atg12-atg5, are required for targeting
of lc3 fusion proteins for mhc class ii loading and en-
hanced mhc class ii presentation, because mutation of
the residue involved in lc3 conjugation to the autophagic
membrane as well as atg12-speciﬁc rna interference in-
hibit this pathway.
discussion
several recent studies have implicated different autopha-
gic pathways in endogenous mhc class ii antigen pro-
cessing (brazil et al., 1997; dengjel et al., 2005; do¨ rfel
et al., 2005; nimmerjahn et al., 2003; paludan et al.,
2005; zhou et al., 2005), but none of them evaluated the
degree to which autophagy is constitutively active in mhc
class ii-positive antigen-presenting cells (apcs) and how
efﬁcient these pathways are for antigen delivery to the
mhc class ii-loading compartment. we provide evidence
in our study that constitutively mhc class ii-positive apcs,
such as b cell lines, monocytes, and dendritic cells, as
well as epithelial cell lines with ifn-g-inducible mhc class
ii expression, display substantial amounts of steady-state
macroautophagy. we found that autophagosomes con-
stitutively fuse with mhc class ii-loading compartments
in epithelial and dendritic cells, and that by targeting this
pathway via fusion to the autophagosome marker lc3,
we could strongly increase mhc class ii presentation and
cd4+ t cell recognition of inﬂuenza mp1. these data sug-
gest that macroautophagy constitutively and efﬁciently
delivers cytosolic antigens for mhc class ii presentation.
in line with our ﬁndings, analysis of gfp-lc3 transgenic
mice has shown that in some murine tissues, e.g., thymus
and kidney epithelium, macroautophagy occurs actively
even under nutrient-rich conditions (mizushima et al.,
2004). our study conﬁrms these results and extends
immunity 26, 79–92, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc. 87
macroautophagy in mhc class ii antigen processing
immunity
constitutive macroautophagy to cell types relevant to the
immune system, including b cells, monocytes, dendritic
cells, and mhc class ii-positive epithelial cells. constitu-
tive macroautophagy might represent a previously under-
estimated pathway for mhc class ii presentation of intra-
cellular proteins, especially in non- or poorly phagocytic
mhc class ii-positive tissues, such as b cells, as well as
epithelial and tumor cells, which upregulate mhc class ii
in response to inﬂammatory cytokines, such as ifn-g
(reith and mach, 2001). interestingly, mhc class ii-posi-
tive epithelial cells have been found to be surrounded by
cytolytic cd4+ t cells at sites of inﬂammation (yawalkar
et al., 2001), suggesting immune surveillance by cd4+
t cells of these tissues in vivo. furthermore, cytolytic anti-
viral cd4+ t cells have been characterized in both mouse
and man ex vivo (appay et al., 2002; jellison et al., 2005)
and have been demonstrated to control viral infections
(fu et al., 2004; paludan et al., 2002; sparks-thissen
et al., 2004). therefore, non- or poorly phagocytic cell
types might depend on endogenous antigen-processing
routes, such as macroautophagy, to load antigen onto
their mhc class ii molecules for immune surveillance of
these tissues by cd4+ t cells.
in dendritic cells, the most proﬁcient antigen-presenting
cells of the immune system, mhc class ii presentation af-
ter macroautophagy, might contribute to the induction of
tolerance and immunity by immature and mature dcs, re-
spectively. although immature dcs are very adept in pick-
ing up exogenous antigens, such as dying cells and envi-
ronmental proteins,
to induce tolerance to self and
innocuous antigens (reviewed in steinman and nussenz-
weig, 2002) or immunity after activation (reviewed in ban-
chereau and steinman, 1998), intracellular proteins must
also be processed onto mhc class ii of dcs to compre-
hensively tolerize against dc-speciﬁc antigens and efﬁ-
ciently prime naive cd4+ t cells after direct infection of
dcs. the latter mechanism might be especially important
for noncytolytic pathogens that leave infected host cells
intact, so that dying cells are not readily available as
a source of exogenous antigen. in these situations, mac-
roautophagy might contribute to endogenous mhc class
ii antigen processing in dcs.
our analysis by electron micrsocopy suggests that au-
tophagosome content meets mhc class ii molecules in
multivesicular bodies. the ultrastructural features of these
mhc class ii- and lc3-containing compartments are con-
sistent with previous descriptions of mhc class ii-loading
compartments (li et al., 2005; trombetta and mellman,
2005; zwart et al., 2005). likewise, colocalization of
gfp-lc3 with hla-dm, a hallmark molecule of the mhc
class ii-loading machinery, suggests that autophago-
somes fuse with miics. multivesicular and multilamellar
vesicles have been identiﬁed as the sites of mhc class ii
mp1-lc3(g120). the next day, ifn-g in culture supernatants was
measured by elisa to assess presentation of mp1 on mhc class ii
or i, respectively. error bars indicate standard deviations and p values
for paired, one-tailed student’s t test statistics across all e:t ratios are
shown. one of two experiments is shown.
figure 7. autophagosome targeting depends on covalent
coupling of lc3 to the autophagosome membrane via
glycine 120
(a) mdamc cells stably expressing gfp-lc3 were infected with lenti-
virus encoding for mp1, mp1-lc3, or mp1-lc3(g120a). to visualize
autophagosomes, cells were treated with 50 mm cq for 10 hr (+cq)
and were stained with anti-mp1 antiserum and dapi and analyzed
by confocal microscopy. scale bars represent 10 mm.
(b) the mp1-speciﬁc cd4+ t cell clone 11.46 or the mp1-speciﬁc
cd8+ t cell clone 9.2 were stimulated at various effector to target
cell (et) ratios with target cells expressing either mp1, mp1-lc3, or
88 immunity 26, 79–92, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc.
immunity
macroautophagy in mhc class ii antigen processing
loading, and a consensus is emerging that these compart-
ments are late endosomes, which in apcs are equipped
with the mhc class ii-loading machinery (kleijmeer
et al., 1997). consistent with our ﬁndings, autophago-
somes have been described to fuse with late endosomes,
forming so-called amphisomes (berg et al., 1998; liou
et al., 1997), but the signiﬁcance of this fusion event for an-
tigen targeting to mhc class ii presentation had not been
investigated. our study closes this knowledge gap and
implicates fusion of autophagosomes with late endosomal
mhc class ii-loading compartments as a means to contin-
ually present cytosolic proteins to cd4+ t cells.
inﬂuenza mp1 could be targeted in our study for en-
hanced mhc class ii presentation by fusion to the auto-
phagosome-associated lc3 protein. although earlier
work by long and colleagues and our experiments with un-
modiﬁed mp1 reveals access of mp1 to mhc class ii pre-
sentation by an intracellular route (gueguen and long,
1996), fusion to lc3 markedly increased mhc class ii pre-
sentation of mp1 by up to 20-fold. this increase occurred
in spite of the fact that the mp1-lc3 fusion protein was ex-
pressed at lower levels than wild-type mp1 after transfec-
tion and did not inﬂuence surface expression of mhc class
ii. therefore, the targeting by macroautophagy might be
harnessed to boost mhc class ii presentation and cd4+
t cell stimulation of vaccine antigens after intracellular de-
livery, for example via viral vectors. because strongly en-
hanced mhc class ii presentation after lc3 targeting
also occurred in dcs, the most potent activators of naive
t cells, this strategy might efﬁciently elicit primary cd4+
t cell responses against vaccine antigens. notably, the
lc3 fusion protein of mp1 used in this study was also efﬁ-
ciently processed onto mhc class i. therefore, dcs, which
express antigens that are efﬁciently targeted to autopha-
gosomes via this pathway, would be expected to efﬁciently
prime both cd4+ and cd8+ t cell responses. because it
has been demonstrated that cd4+ t cells in addition to
the above-outlined direct antiviral function are essential
for the maintenance of protective cd8+ t cell effector func-
tions and memory (bevan, 2004), improved stimulation of
helper t cells could be a valuable component of vaccine
development. particularly in recombinant viral vaccines,
targeting of antigens for endogenous mhc class ii pro-
cessing via macroautophagy should be considered.
experimental procedures
cell culture
all human epithelial cell lines were routinely cultured in dmem with
10% fcs, 2 mm glutamine, 110 mg/ml sodium pyruvate, and 2 mg/ml
gentamycin. b cell lines and hybridomas were maintained in rpmi-
1640 with 10% fcs + glutamine + gentamycin. sources of cell lines
are included in the supplemental data. monocytes and dendritic cells
(dcs) were prepared from pbmcs isolated from leukocyte concen-
trates (buffy coats) from the new york blood center or blood dona-
tions from healthy lab donors, who provided informed consent for
this rockefeller university internal review board-approved study.
positive selection for cd14-positive monocytes/macrophages was
performed with anti-cd14 microbeads from miltenyi biotec. dcs
were generated from cd14-positive cells in rpmi-1640 + 1% single-
donor plasma + glutamine + gentamycin. recombinant human il-4
(rhil-4, 500 u/ml) and rhgmcsf (1000 u/ml) were added on day 0,
2, and 4. for maturation, ﬂoating immature dcs were transferred to
new plates on day 5, and half of the medium was replaced with fresh
medium containing proinﬂammatory cytokines (il-1b [10 ng/ml], il-6
[1000 u/ml], tnf-a [10 ng/ml], and pge2 [1 mg/ml]) or 200 ng/ml lipo-
polysaccharide (lps). all cytokines were obtained from r&d systems,
peprotech, berlex, or sigma. for lentiviral transduction of dcs, cd14+
monocytes were infected with lentivirus at an moi of 10 on day 1 after
isolation, in the presence of 8 mg/ml polybrene and il-4/gm-csf, and
immature/mature dcs were generated as described above.
lc3 fusion constructs and generation of stable transfectants
the cdna of human map1lc3b sequence (nm_022818) was cloned
from a human b-lcl by rt-pcr with gene-speciﬁc primers. the
cdna of inﬂuenza a/wsn/33 matrix protein 1 (mp1) was pcr ampli-
ﬁed from the pcaggs/mcs-mp1 vector, a gift from p. palese (mount
sinai school of medicine, ny). a more detailed description of plasmids
and lentiviral constructs can be found in the supplemental data. hela
and 293 cell lines stably expressing gfp-lc3 were generated by tran-
sient transfection with lipofectamine 2000 (invitrogen) and subsequent
culture in the presence of 500 mg/ml g418. hacat, mdamc, and cm-
lcl cell lines stably expressing gfp-lc3, mp1-lc3, or mp1 were
generated by lentiviral infection with mois of 10–40.
knockdown of atg12
the following 21-nt sirna oligos were used: atg12 sense: 50-ucaa
cuugcuacuacaugaudt; atg12 antisense: 50-ucauguaguag
caaguugaudt (nt. 687–705 of nm_004707). as a control, lamin a/c-
speciﬁc sirna from dharmacon (lamin sense: 50-cuggacuucc
agaagaacadtdt; lamin antisense: 50-uguucuucuggaagucc
agdtdt) or ﬁreﬂy luciferase-speciﬁc sirna (gl2 sense: 50-cguac
gcggaauacuucgadtdt; gl2 antisense: 50-ucgaaguauucc
gcguacgdtdt) was used. sirna duplexes were delivered by trans-
fection with lipofectamine 2000 (invitrogen) at 30 pmol sirna + 1.5 ml
lipofectamine/well in a 24-well format, and effect of knockdown was
analyzed after 2–3 days.
antibodies
the lc3 antiserum was generated by immunizing two rabbits with the
n-terminal peptide lc31-15 (mpsektfkqrrtfeqr) conjugated to
klh carrier protein (cocalico biologicals, reamstown, pa). animals
were boosted 5 times (2, 3, 7, 11, and 15 weeks after initial inoculation)
and then sacriﬁced to obtain terminal bleeds. antiserum collected from
one rabbit showed good lc3 reactivity by elisa and western blot and
was used for western blots at a dilution of 1:2000. inﬂuenza mp1-spe-
ciﬁc rabbit antiserum was a gift from a. helenius (zu¨ rich, switzerland).
rabbit anti-hla-dr antiserum c6861 for electron microscopy was
a gift from p. cresswell, yale university (new haven, ct). rabbit
anti-gfp antibody was purchased from invitrogen-molecular probes
and anti-b-actin antibody from sigma. anti-mhc class i and ii anti-
bodies for
immunocytochemistry were hybridoma supernatants
iva12 and w6/32 from atcc, anti-hla-dm (clone map-dm1) was
from bd biosciences pharmingen, anti-lamp-2 (clone h4b4) from
southern biotechnology associates, anti-eea1 from santa cruz bio-
tech, and anti-transferrin receptor (clone df 1513)
from sigma.
secondary antibodies for immunohistrochemistry were rhodamine-
red-x-(rrx)-conjugated donkey anti-mouse or anti-rabbit or anti-
goat iggs from jackson immunoresearch.
immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy
epithelial cells were grown on microscopy cover glasses in 24-well
plates overnight, whereas b cells or dendritic cells were plated onto
polylysine-coated cover glasses immediately before the staining pro-
cedure. cells were ﬁxed in 3% paraformaldehyde in pbs for 15 min
and permeabilized in 0.1% triton x-100 in pbs for 5 min. cells were
blocked for 30 min in blocking buffer (from perkin elmer’s tsa kit) +
0.1% saponin. primary and secondary antibodies were applied
in blocking buffer + 0.1% saponin + 5% normal donkey serum for
immunity 26, 79–92, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc. 89
immunity
macroautophagy in mhc class ii antigen processing
30–60 min, followed by three 5 min washes in pbs + 0.1% saponin. finally, cells were stained with dapi nucleic acid stain (0.5 mg/ml, invitrogen-molecular probes) for 1 min and cover glasses were mounted onto
microscope slides with prolong gold antifade reagent (invitrogenmolecular probes). all steps were carried out at room temperature.
cells were analyzed with an inverted lsm 510 laser scanning confocal
microscope (zeiss axiovert 200) with a 63 or 1003/1.4 n.a. oil immersion lens with a pinhole diameter of 1 airy unit. pictures were taken with
the lsm 510 confocal software (zeiss). colocalization of markers was
quantified with the profile tool of the lsm 510 software. the number of
double-positive vesicles compared to the total number of red vesicles
was determined in 10–15 double-positive cells/condition.
electron microscopy and immunolabeling of cryosections
mdamc cells stably transfected with gfp-lc3 were fixed for 1 hr at
rt with 4% paraformaldehyde (pfa, electron microscopy sciences)
in 0.25 m hepes (ph 7.4), followed by overnight fixation at 4 c in
8% pfa/hepes. cells were embedded in 5% gelatin in pbs, and
small pieces of gelatin pellets were infiltrated overnight at 4 c with
2.3 m sucrose in pbs, mounted onto cryospecimen pins, and frozen
in liquid nitrogen. ultrathin sections (80 nm) were cut with a leica ultracut ultramicrotome with an fcs cryoattachment at 108 c and collected on formvar- and carbon-coated nickel grids with a 1:1 mixture
of 2% methyl cellulose (25 centipoises; sigma) and 2.3 m sucrose in
pbs. cells were quenched with 0.1 m nh4cl in pbs, blocked in 1%
fish skin gelatin (fsg, sigma) in pbs, and subsequently labeled with
rabbit anti-hla-dr antiserum and 10 or 15 nm protein a-gold (purchased from the department of cell biology, university of utrecht,
netherlands). after fixation in 1% glutaraldehyde and quenching with
0.1 m nh4cl, the same labeling procedure was repeated for the rabbit
anti-gfp antibody. after final fixation in 1% glutaraldehyde, grids were
washed 83 in hplc-grade water. sections were infiltrated for 10 min
on ice with a mixture of 1.8% methylcellulose and 0.5% uranyl acetate
(electron microscopy sciences), washed 33 in 0.5% uranyl acetate/
1.8% methylcellulose, and air-dried. samples were analyzed in a tecnai 12 biotwin (fei) microscope and pictures were taken with kodak
4489 film.
t cell clones
influenza a matrix protein 1 (mp1)-specific t cell clones were generated as previously described (fonteneau et al., 2001) and outlined
briefly in the supplemental data. peptide epitopes of mp1-specific
clones were determined in ifn-g elispot assays with an mp1 peptide library (64 15-mer peptides overlapping by 10 amino acids).
clones were tested for cd4/cd8 expression by staining with anticd4-pe and anti-cd8-pe (bd biosciences pharmingen) and subsequent analysis by flow cytometry on a facscalibur instrument (becton-dickinson).
supplemental data
supplemental data include six figures and supplemental experimental
procedures and can be found with this article online at http://www.
immunity.com/cgi/content/full/26/1/79/dc1/.
acknowledgments
we thank r. steinman for critically reading the manuscript; r. khanna,
i. joab, m. vockerodt, and d. kube for the gift of cell lines; i. tcherepanova for the gift of rna; m. landthaler and t. tuschl for the gift of
sirnas; p. palese and j. luban for the gift of dna vectors; and a. helenius and p. cresswell for the gift of antibodies. this work was supported by the arnold and mabel beckman foundation, the alexandrine
and alexander sinsheimer foundation, the burroughs wellcome fund,
the national cancer institute (r01ca108609 and r01ca101741) (to
c.m.), and in part by a general clinical research center grant (m01rr00102) from the national center for research resources at the
national institutes of health (to the rockefeller university hospital).
d.s. is a recipient of a predoctoral fellowship from the schering
foundation.
received: august 17, 2006
revised: october 11, 2006
accepted: october 19, 2006
published online: december 21, 2006
references
appay, v., zaunders, j.j., papagno, l., sutton, j., jaramillo, a., waters, a., easterbrook, p., grey, p., smith, d., mcmichael, a.j., et al.
(2002). characterization of cd4+ ctls ex vivo. j. immunol. 168,
5954–5958.
banchereau, j., and steinman, r.m. (1998). dendritic cells and the
control of immunity. nature 392, 245–252.
berg, t.o., fengsrud, m., stromhaug, p.e., berg, t., and seglen, p.o.
(1998). isolation and characterization of rat liver amphisomes. evidence for fusion of autophagosomes with both early and late endosomes. j. biol. chem. 273, 21883–21892.
bevan, m.j. (2004). helping the cd8+ t-cell response. nat. rev. immunol. 4, 595–602.
brazil, m.i., weiss, s., and stockinger, b. (1997). excessive degradation of intracellular protein in macrophages prevents presentation in
the context of major histocompatibility complex class ii molecules.
eur. j. immunol. 27, 1506–1514.
bryant, p., and ploegh, h. (2004). class ii mhc peptide loading by the
professionals. curr. opin. immunol. 16, 96–102.
t cell assay and ifn-g elisa
mp1- and mp-lc3-expressing target cells were cocultured overnight
with mp1-specific t cell clones in rpmi-1640 with 5% phs + glutamine + gentamycin (5% phs medium) in a 96-well round bottom plate
(105 t cells/well + variable target cell numbers). hacat target cells were
treated with 200 u/ml ifn-g 24 hr before the coculture to upregulate
mhc class ii expression, but were washed 33 in dmem before addition of t cells to remove ifn-g. after coculture, ifn-g in culture supernatants was measured with the human ifn-g elisa kit from mabtech
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. recombinant human
ifn-g (mabtech) at concentrations of 30–2000 pg/ml was used as
a standard. if ifn-g levels in supernatants exceeded 2000 pg/ml, supernatants were diluted in 5% phs medium and ifn-g was remeasured by elisa.
chen, m., shirai, m., liu, z., arichi, t., takahashi, h., and nishioka, m.
(1998). efficient class ii major histocompatibility complex presentation
of endogenously synthesized hepatitis c virus core protein by epsteinbarr virus-transformed b-lymphoblastoid cell lines to cd4+ t cells.
j. virol. 72, 8301–8308.
statistics
paired or homocedastic one-tailed student’s t test statistics were applied where indicated.
dengjel, j., schoor, o., fischer, r., reich, m., kraus, m., muller, m.,
kreymborg, k., altenberend, f., brandenburg, j., kalbacher, h.,
et al. (2005). autophagy promotes mhc class ii presentation of
90 immunity 26, 79–92, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc.
chicz, r.m., urban, r.g., gorga, j.c., vignali, d.a., lane, w.s., and
strominger, j.l. (1993). specificity and promiscuity among naturally
processed peptides bound to hla-dr alleles. j. exp. med. 178,
27–47.
codogno, p., and meijer, a.j. (2005). autophagy and signaling: their
role in cell survival and cell death. cell death differ. 12, 1509–1518.
cresswell, p., ackerman, a.l., giodini, a., peaper, d.r., and wearsch,
p.a. (2005). mechanisms of mhc class i-restricted antigen processing
and cross-presentation. immunol. rev. 207, 145–157.
immunity
macroautophagy in mhc class ii antigen processing
peptides from intracellular source proteins. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa
102, 7922–7927.
majeski, a.e., and dice, j.f. (2004). mechanisms of chaperone-medi-
ated autophagy. int. j. biochem. cell biol. 36, 2435–2444.
deretic, v. (2006). autophagy as an immune defense mechanism. curr.
opin. immunol. 18, 375–382.
mellman, i., and steinman, r.m. (2001). dendritic cells: specialized
and regulated antigen processing machines. cell 106, 255–258.
dongre, a.r., kovats, s., deroos, p., mccormack, a.l., naka-
gawa, t., paharkova-vatchkova, v., eng, j., caldwell, h., yates,
j.r., 3rd, and rudensky, a.y. (2001). in vivo mhc class ii presen-
tation of cytosolic proteins revealed by rapid automated tandem
mass spectrometry and functional analyses. eur. j. immunol. 31,
1485–1494.
do¨ rfel, d., appel, s., grunebach, f., weck, m.m., muller, m.r., heine,
a., and brossart, p. (2005). processing and presentation of hla class i
and ii epitopes by dendritic cells after transfection with in vitro tran-
scribed muc1 rna. blood 105, 3199–3205.
fonteneau, j.f., larsson, m., somersan, s., sanders, c., mu¨ nz, c.,
kwok, w.w., bhardwaj, n., and jotereau, f. (2001). generation of
high quantities of viral and tumor-speciﬁc human cd4+ and cd8+ t-
cell clones using peptide pulsed mature dendritic cells. j. immunol.
methods 258, 111–126.
friede, t., gnau, v., jung, g., keilholz, w., stevanovic, s., and ram-
mensee, h.g. (1996). natural
ligand motifs of closely related hla-
dr4 molecules predict features of rheumatoid arthritis associated
peptides. biochim. biophys. acta 1316, 85–101.
fu, t., voo, k.s., and wang, r.f. (2004). critical role of ebna1-spe-
ciﬁc cd4+ t cells in the control of mouse burkitt lymphoma in vivo.
j. clin. invest. 114, 542–550.
gueguen, m., and long, e.o. (1996). presentation of a cytosolic anti-
gen by major histocompatibility complex class ii molecules requires
a long-lived form of the antigen. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 93,
14692–14697.
jacobson, s., sekaly, r.p., jacobson, c.l., mcfarland, h.f., and
long, e.o. (1989). hla class ii-restricted presentation of cytoplas-
mic measles virus antigens to cytotoxic t cells. j. virol. 63, 1756–
1762.
jaraquemada, d., marti, m., and long, e.o. (1990). an endogenous
processing pathway in vaccinia virus-infected cells for presentation
of cytoplasmic antigens to class ii-restricted t cells. j. exp. med.
172, 947–954.
jellison, e.r., kim, s.k., and welsh, r.m. (2005). cutting edge: mhc
class ii-restricted killing in vivo during viral
infection. j. immunol.
174, 614–618.
kabeya, y., mizushima, n., ueno, t., yamamoto, a., kirisako, t.,
noda, t., kominami, e., ohsumi, y., and yoshimori, t. (2000). lc3,
a mammalian homologue of yeast apg8p, is localized in autophago-
some membranes after processing. embo j. 19, 5720–5728.
kleijmeer, m.j., morkowski, s., grifﬁth, j.m., rudensky, a.y., and
geuze, h.j. (1997). major histocompatibility complex class ii compart-
ments in human and mouse b lymphoblasts represent conventional
endocytic compartments. j. cell biol. 139, 639–649.
mizushima, n. (2005). the pleiotropic role of autophagy: from protein
metabolism to bactericide. cell death differ. 12 (suppl 2), 1535–
1541.
mizushima, n., yamamoto, a., matsui, m., yoshimori, t., and ohsumi,
y. (2004). in vivo analysis of autophagy in response to nutrient starva-
tion using transgenic mice expressing a ﬂuorescent autophagosome
marker. mol. biol. cell 15, 1101–1111.
muntasell, a., carrascal, m., alvarez, i., serradell, l., van veelen, p.,
verreck, f.a., koning, f., abian, j., and jaraquemada, d. (2004). dis-
section of the hla-dr4 peptide repertoire in endocrine epithelial cells:
strong inﬂuence of invariant chain and hla-dm expression on the na-
ture of ligands. j. immunol. 173, 1085–1093.
nimmerjahn, f., milosevic, s., behrends, u., jaffee, e.m., pardoll,
d.m., bornkamm, g.w., and mautner, j. (2003). major histocompati-
bility complex class ii-restricted presentation of a cytosolic antigen
by autophagy. eur. j. immunol. 33, 1250–1259.
paludan, c., bickham, k., nikiforow, s., tsang, m.l., goodman, k.,
hanekom, w.a., fonteneau, j.f., stevanovic, s., and mu¨ nz, c.
(2002). ebna1 speciﬁc cd4+ th1 cells kill burkitt’s lymphoma cells.
j. immunol. 169, 1593–1603.
paludan, c., schmid, d., landthaler, m., vockerodt, m., kube, d.,
tuschl, t., and mu¨ nz, c. (2005). endogenous mhc class ii process-
ing of a viral nuclear antigen after autophagy. science 307, 593–
596.
qi, l., rojas, j.m., and ostrand-rosenberg, s. (2000). tumor cells
present mhc class ii-restricted nuclear and mitochondrial antigens
and are the predominant antigen presenting cells in vivo. j. immunol.
165, 5451–5461.
reith, w., and mach, b. (2001). the bare lymphocyte syndrome
and the regulation of mhc expression. annu. rev. immunol. 19,
331–373.
schmid, d., and mu¨ nz, c. (2005). immune surveillance of intracellular
pathogens via autophagy. cell death differ. 12 (suppl 2), 1519–
1527.
shintani, t., and klionsky, d.j. (2004). autophagy in health and dis-
ease: a double-edged sword. science 306, 990–995.
sparks-thissen, r.l., braaten, d.c., kreher, s., speck, s.h., and
virgin, h.w. (2004). an optimized cd4 t-cell response can control
productive and latent gammaherpesvirus infection. j. virol. 78, 6827–
6835.
steinman, r.m., and nussenzweig, m.c. (2002). avoiding horror auto-
toxicus: the importance of dendritic cells in peripheral t cell tolerance.
proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 99, 351–358.
steinman, r.m., hawiger, d., and nussenzweig, m.c. (2003). tolero-
genic dendritic cells. annu. rev. immunol. 21, 685–711.
lechler, r., aichinger, g., and lightstone, l. (1996). the endogenous
pathway of mhc class ii antigen presentation. immunol. rev. 151,
51–79.
tanida, i., minematsu-ikeguchi, n., ueno, t., and kominami, e. (2005).
lysosomal turnover, but not a cellular level, of endogenous lc3 is
a marker for autophagy. autophagy 1, 84–91.
li, p., gregg, j.l., wang, n., zhou, d., o’donnell, p., blum, j.s., and
crotzer, v.l. (2005). compartmentalization of class ii antigen presen-
tation: contribution of cytoplasmic and endosomal processing. immu-
nol. rev. 207, 206–217.
lich, j.d., elliott, j.f., and blum, j.s. (2000). cytoplasmic processing
is a prerequisite for presentation of an endogenous antigen by major
histocompatibility complex class ii proteins. j. exp. med. 191, 1513–
1524.
trombetta, e.s., and mellman, i. (2005). cell biology of antigen pro-
cessing in vitro and in vivo. annu. rev. immunol. 23, 975–1028.
yawalkar, n., hunger, r.e., buri, c., schmid, s., egli, f., brand, c.u.,
mueller, c., pichler, w.j., and braathen, l.r. (2001). a comparative
study of the expression of cytotoxic proteins in allergic contact derma-
titis and psoriasis: spongiotic skin lesions in allergic contact dermatitis
are highly inﬁltrated by t cells expressing perforin and granzyme b.
am. j. pathol. 158, 803–808.
liou, w., geuze, h.j., geelen, m.j., and slot, j.w. (1997). the auto-
phagic and endocytic pathways converge at the nascent autophagic
vacuoles. j. cell biol. 136, 61–70.
yewdell, j.w., reits, e., and neefjes, j. (2003). making sense of mass
destruction: quantitating mhc class i antigen presentation. nat. rev.
immunol. 3, 952–961.
immunity 26, 79–92, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc. 91
macroautophagy in mhc class ii antigen processing
immunity
yorimitsu, t., and klionsky, d.j. (2005). autophagy: molecular machin-
ery for self-eating. cell death differ. 12 (suppl 2), 1542–1552.
zeng, g., wang, x., robbins, p.f., rosenberg, s.a., and wang, r.f.
(2001). cd4+ t cell recognition of mhc class ii-restricted epitopes
from ny-eso-1 presented by a prevalent hla dp4 allele: association
with ny-eso-1 antibody production. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 98,
3964–3969.
zhou, d., li, p., lott, j.m., hislop, a., canaday, d.h., brutkiewicz,
r.r., and blum, j.s. (2005). lamp-2a facilitates mhc class ii presen-
tation of cytoplasmic antigens. immunity 22, 571–581.
zwart, w., griekspoor, a., kuijl, c., marsman, m., van rheenen, j.,
janssen, h., calafat, j., van ham, m., janssen, l., van lith, m., et al.
(2005). spatial separation of hla-dm/hla-dr interactions within miic
and phagosome-induced immune escape. immunity 22, 221–233.
92 immunity 26, 79–92, january 2007 ª2007 elsevier inc.