autophagy in the control of programmed cell death
shalaka patel, jeffrey caplan and sp dinesh-kumar
programmed cell death (pcd) is essential for plant
development and immunity. localized pcd is associated with
the hypersensitive response (hr), which is a constituent
of a successful plant innate immune response. plants have
developed mechanisms to meticulously prevent hr-pcd
lesions from spreading. our understanding of these
mechanisms is still in its incipient stages. a recent study
demonstrated that autophagy, a universally conserved
process of macromolecule turnover, plays a pivotal role
in controlling hr-pcd. the molecular identity of the
mediators between the pcd and hr pathways is still
obscure, but recent work has begun to shed light on the
relationship between hr-pcd and autophagy and to
suggest possible mechanisms for the regulation of
these pathways.
currently, we know very little about the mechanisms that
limit hr-pcd to the initiation site. it is clear that hrpcd that is induced at the site of infection should be
carefully controlled; otherwise, uncontrolled pcd would
cause damage to the surrounding uninfected cells.
because plants cells, unlike animal cells, that are undergoing pcd are not removed by phagocytosis, healthy
cells need to be protected from toxic materials that might
be transported from dying cells. recent evidence indicates that autophagy that is induced during the plant
innate immune response is one mechanism by which hrpcd is controlled [7]. in this review, we discuss the role
of autophagy in hr-pcd and propose possible mechanisms by which autophagy controls hr-pcd.
autophagy in plants
addresses
department of molecular, cellular, and developmental biology, yale
university, new haven, connecticut 06520-8103, usa
corresponding author: dinesh-kumar, sp (savithramma.dineshkumar@yale.edu)
current opinion in plant biology 2006, 9:391–396
this review comes from a themed issue on
biotic interactions
edited by anne osbourn and sheng yang he
available online 19th may 2006
1369-5266/$ – see front matter
# 2006 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
doi 10.1016/j.pbi.2006.05.007
introduction
programmed cell death (pcd) plays an important role
during development, senescence and immunity in multicellular organisms [1,2]. the most extensively studied
form of plant pcd is the hypersensitive response (hr) to
pathogen infection [1,3]. although the biological relevance of hr-pcd is not fully understood, its timely
activation is thought to be essential for containment of
the pathogen to the infection site.
some of our understanding about the control and execution of hr-pcd comes from the analysis of lesion mimic
mutants that exhibit spontaneous hr-like pcd in the
absence of a pathogen [4]. additionally, several studies
have implicated the role of signaling molecules, such as
reactive oxygen species (ros), nitric oxide (no) and
salicylic acid (sa), in hr-pcd [5,6].
www.sciencedirect.com
autophagy is a process that is conserved across strata and
entails the engulfment of cytoplasmic constituents into
double-membraned vesicles called autophagosomes,
which are then targeted to the vacuole or to lysosomes
for degradation [8]. genetic screens in yeast have identified several autophagy (atg) genes that are required for
proper autophagic activity [9]. even though autophagylike activity has been observed in numerous plant morphological studies over the past three decades, significant
progress in understanding autophagic machinery in plants
has been made only recently [10,11]. most of the yeast
orthologs of atg genes are present in plants, and two
main approaches have been used to assess the function of
these genes: complementation of yeast atg mutants and
rna interference (rnai) or knockout plants.
the arabidopsis atg genes atatg4a/b, atatg8 and
atatg6/beclin 1 have been shown to complement their
respective yeast deletion strains by restoring their ability
to form autophagosomes or to perform autophagic activity
[7,12,13]. the arabidopsis knockout mutant atg7 has a
senescence defect and hypersensitivity to nitrogen and
carbon starvation, consistent with a requirement for
autophagy during nutrient limitation in yeast and other
higher eukaryotes [14]. autophagy might also play a role
in normal plant development because senescence is
accelerated in an atatg4a/atatg4b double mutant even
under nutrient-rich conditions [12]. arabidopsis atg3,
atg5, atg9 and atg13 mutants have identical developmental
phenotypes: accelerated senescence, bolting and reduced
seed set [10,11].
autophagy as a regulator of pcd in plants
the tobacco n resistance protein specifically recognizes
the 50 kda helicase domain of the tobacco mosaic virus
(tmv) replicase protein, triggering hr-pcd and limiting
current opinion in plant biology 2006, 9:391–396
392 biotic interactions
figure 1
autophagy is required to prevent spread of hr-pcd. (a) silencing of the autophagy gene beclin 1 induces uncontrolled hr-pcd upon infection with
tmv-green fluorescent protein (gfp). representative photographs of leaves from non-silenced control (vigs-vector) and beclin 1-silenced
(vigs-beclin 1) plants infected with tmv-gfp. in uv illumination photographs, green fluorescence indicates tmv–gfp infection spots and red
color in the background is due to chlorophyll autofluorescence. dpi, days post infection. reprinted from liu et al. [7] with permission.
(b) autophagy is induced during hr-pcd. lysotracker red-stained autolysosome-like structures are present inside the vacuole (green) in nonsilenced control plants (left panel) but absent from beclin 1-silenced plants (right panel) each infected with tmv. red structures are
chloroplasts. scale bar represents 10 mm. reprinted from liu et al. [7].
tmv to the infection site [15]. to identify regulators of
hr-pcd, liu et al. [7] performed a high-throughput
virus-induced gene silencing (vigs) screen in n-containing (nn) nicotiana benthamiana plants. in this screen,
silencing of the plant ortholog of the yeast and mammalian atg6/beclin 1 resulted in uncontrolled hr-pcd
upon tmv infection, indicated by the spread of hrpcd into healthy uninfected tissue ([7]; figure 1a).
this phenotype is dependent on the presence of the n
gene because beclin 1 silencing does not induce pcd
upon tmv infection in plants that lack the n gene.
silencing of atg6/beclin 1 in nn plants compromises
the induction of autophagy at the site of hr-pcd and in
surrounding healthy tissue ([7]; figure 1b). interestingly, beclin 1 is also required to limit hr-pcd that is
induced by the activation of other resistance genes [7].
besides beclin 1, other autophagy genes, including those
that encode vps34/class iii phosphatidylinositol-3kinase (pi3k), atg3 and atg7, are necessary to restrict
hr-pcd to the infection site. these results indicate that
autophagy plays a pro-survival function by preventing the
current opinion in plant biology 2006, 9:391–396
death of healthy uninfected cells during a plant defense
response.
the findings of liu et al. [7] imply that there is a prodeath signal that moves out of the hr lesion into the
surrounding uninfected tissue. therefore, autophagy
most likely alters the induction, movement, and/or recognition of the pro-pcd signal. alternatively, the inherent
degradative function of autophagy could facilitate the
degradation of a pro-pcd signal in cells adjacent to
the site of signal production.
possible pcd mediators
possible candidates for a pro-pcd signal include ros,
no or an unidentified secreted protein- or lipid-based
signal. as extracellular ros are produced before the
onset of hr-pcd, ros have been thought to function
as pro-pcd signals, either by directly killing the pathogen or by acting as signaling molecules that mediate
defense responses [5]. in animals, the nadph oxidase
complex is responsible for the production of ros [16].
www.sciencedirect.com
autophagy in the control of programmed cell death patel, caplan and dinesh-kumar 393
in arabidopsis, the respiratory burst oxidase homolog (rboh)
genes, atrbohd and atrbohf, encode the gp91phox component of nadph oxidase. these two atrboh genes are
required for the production of most of the ros generated
during hr-pcd [17].
like ros, no is produced rapidly before the initiation of
hr-pcd, but unlike ros, no induces cell death
through cyclic gmp [6]. nitric oxide synthase 1 is responsible for the production of 80% of no during pathogen
infection, while the remaining 20% might be produced by
nitrate reductase or via an unidentified pathway [18]. in
certain animal cells, low levels of no can protect cells
from apoptosis and high no concentrations can induce
apoptosis [19]. it is unclear, however, if no is both a proand an anti-death signal in plants.
recently emerging evidence has indicated that ros
generated by nadph oxidase have anti-pcd function
rather than pro-pcd function [20]. the excess ros
production in the lsd1 (lesion simulating disease 1) lesion
mimic mutant was thought to cause uncontrolled hrpcd [21]. it was therefore hypothesized that a lsd1
atrbohd atrbohf triple mutant would suppress the lsd1
phenotype [20]. although the triple mutant shows
decreased ros production; and unexpectedly, it accentuates the lsd1 cell death. this phenotype is suppressed by
overexpression of atrbohd. additionally, application of
exogenous superoxide activates atrbohd function to
negatively regulate cell death in the lsd1 mutant [20].
these results indicate that the ros generated by atrbohd and atrbohf are not the cause of hr-pcd but
function to negatively regulate it. interestingly, in beclin
1-silenced plants, h2o2 is not the signal that causes
uncontrolled hr-pcd (y liu, m schiff, sp dineshkumar, unpublished). it is still possible, however, that
superoxide or no might be responsible for spreading
hr-pcd in beclin 1-silenced plants. given the results
obtained from beclin 1-silencing, an interesting question
would be, ‘is autophagy required to limit pcd in the lsd1
mutant?’ this could be tested by constitutively activating
autophagy in the lsd1 mutant.
another interesting question is, ‘what role(s) do ros
play in hr-pcd?’ given that treatment with the
nadph oxidase inhibitor diphenylene iodonium
decreases hr-pcd in the lsd1 mutant, it is clear that
ros derived from flavin-containing oxidases that are
encoded by genes other than atrbohd and atrbohf are
responsible for pcd. genes encoding other flavin-containing oxidases and their corresponding proteins are
unknown. their characterization will be pivotal in the
understanding the role of ros in pcd. an analysis of
autophagic activity in nadph oxidase and other flavincontaining oxidase mutants will be instrumental in developing an understanding of the complex interplay between
ros, autophagy and pcd.
www.sciencedirect.com
autophagy — pro or anti cell death?
in plants, autophagy is not required for hr-pcd execution but is required to limit pcd to the infection sites
[7]. therefore, our data suggest that autophagy has an
anti-pcd function in innate immunity. however, examination of the function of atg genes in other higher
eukaryotes indicates that autophagy might have a dual
role: pro- and/or anti-cell death [22–25,26]. whether
autophagy functions in cell survival or cell death could
depend on the level of autophagy induced during a given
physiological condition [26]. in animal cells, the antiapoptotic protein bcl-2 interacts with beclin 1 to control
the level of induction of autophagy [26,27], indicating
an important cross talk between the two cell-death pathways. although no sequence homolog of bcl-2 has yet
been identified in plants, a functional homolog might be
present. the identification and functional characterization of proteins that work in conjunction with beclin 1 will
shed light on the mechanism by which autophagy regulates hr-pcd during the innate immune response of
plants.
possible mediators of the crosstalk between
pcd and autophagy
vacuolar-processing enzyme
cysteine proteases called caspases are key executioners
of pcd in metazoans [28]. although caspase-like activities have been detected in plants, genes that encode
caspase orthologs have not been identified. recent data
indicate, however, that vacuolar-processing enzyme
(vpe) exhibits caspase-1 like activity [29]. moreover,
silencing of vpe results in a loss of tmv-induced hrpcd [29].
the processing of vpe by the translocation of its precursor to the vacuole is reminiscent of the processing of
carboxypeptidase y (cpy) in yeast [30]. trafficking of
the cpy during cytoplasm-to-vacuole transport (cvt)
uses several components of the autophagic pathway,
including atg6/beclin 1 [8]. a cvt pathway has not
been described in plants; however, beclin 1 could facilitate the autophagic degradation of vpe and, hence,
silencing of beclin 1 might result in increased vpe levels
that lead to uncontrolled hr-pcd. alternatively, beclin
1 could facilitate the processing and maturation of vpe
that is needed for hr-pcd initiation, but prevent the
spread of pcd through a vpe-independent pathway.
undoubtedly, an examination of vpe levels and vpe
processing in beclin1-silenced plants should provide
insights on these possibilities.
avrpto-dependent pto-interacting protein 3
in mammals, autophagy is regulated by two different
pi3k [8]. vps34/class iii pi3k associates with beclin
1, and together, these proteins are required for the
activation of autophagy. by contrast, class i pi3k inhibits
autophagy, presumably by activating 3-phosphoinositidecurrent opinion in plant biology 2006, 9:391–396
394 biotic interactions
figure 2
proposed model for autophagy regulation by pi3k and ceramides. green letters indicate the presence of homologs of these components in
plants; black letters indicate the absence of these components in plants. question marks indicate an uncertain signaling event.
dependent kinase 1 (pdk1) and protein kinase b (pkb/
akt) (figure 2). pdk1 and pkb proteins are activated
when bound by phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate
(ptdins[3,4,5]p3), a class i pi3k product. pdk1 is known
to interact directly with pkb and to phosphorylate this
protein ([31]; figure 2).
opposing roles could be that the class iii pi3k must
associate with beclin 1 to form a scaffold that positively
regulates autophagy. in this scenario, interaction with
beclin 1 would quench pi3k activity. when pi3k is
unbound, however, the products of the active pi3k might
inhibit autophagy.
recent evidence indicates that the tomato homolog of
pkb/akt, avrpto-dependent pto-interacting protein 3
(adi3), is phosphorylated by tomato pdk1 (lepdk1),
in analogy to the mammalian system [32]. silencing of
adi3 and pdk1 leads to localized cell death without
pathogen infection, indicating that these genes function
as negative regulators of pcd. as discussed previously,
liu et al. [7] demonstrated that the plant class iii pi3k
is important for restricting hr-pcd to the infection site.
plants
i pi3k and consequently lack
ptdins(3,4,5)p3 [33], so how are adi3 and lepdk1 acti-
vated? one possibility is that binding to the class iii
pi3k product ptdins3p activates these kinases (figure 2).
in fact, arabidopsis pdk1 preferentially binds ptdins3p
rather than ptdins(3,4,5)p3 in vitro [34]. so, do plant adi3
and pdk1 function to inhibit autophagy? and does class
iii pi3k play a role in plants (i.e. facilitating pcd and
negatively controlling autophagy) that is opposite to its
role in mammals? one possible explanation for these
lack class
ceramides
in animals, ceramides have been shown to control auto-
phagy by stimulating beclin 1 expression and by interfering
with pkb activation [35]. as in mammalian cells, c2-
ceramide induces pcd in arabidopsis cells and proto-
plasts [36,37]. the arabidopsis ceramide kinase mutant
accelerated cell death 5 (acd5) shows acute cell death after an
infection with the pathogen pseudomonas syringae [36].
treatment of acd5 mutant protoplasts with unphosphory-
lated ceramides induces pcd, whereas phosphorylated
ceramides inhibit pcd. since autophagy is stimulated by
ceramides in animals, it would be interesting to test if
autophagy is affected in acd5 mutants that accumulate
unphosphorylated lipid ceramides.
concluding remarks
the prevention of pcd by autophagy has raised impor-
tant questions about crosstalk between these pathways.
silencing of beclin 1 and class iii pi3k suggests that
current opinion in plant biology 2006, 9:391–396
www.sciencedirect.com
autophagy in the control of programmed cell death patel, caplan and dinesh-kumar 395
autophagy might prevent a pro-death signal from initiating pcd in healthy tissue. ros and no are likely
candidates for the pro-death signal because they can
spread cell-to-cell and have been implicated as signals
that initiate cell death; however, it is possible that the
pro-death signal is an unidentified secreted protein- or
lipid-based signal. once the signal has been identified,
it will be crucial to understand how it turns on pcd
and whether autophagy prevents its function. furthermore, what are the signals that induce or downregulate
autophagy during a plant defense response, and does
autophagy have additional roles during disease resistance?
it is possible that autophagy is required to process and/or
traffic pathogenesis-related proteins or signaling components during plant defense. further examination of the
striking conservation of autophagy between plants and
animals will continue to provide valuable insight, while
powerful forward genetic screens and biochemical approaches will be required to discover components that are
specific to the interplay between pcd and autophagy in
plants.
acknowledgements
we thank tessa burch-smith and montrell seay for critical reading of the
review. autophagy work in spd-k lab is supported by grants from the
us national institute of health (nih) and national science foundation
(nsf).
references and recommended reading
papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of
review, have been highlighted as:
 of special interest
 of outstanding interest
1.
greenberg jt, yao n: the role and regulation of programmed
cell death in plant–pathogen interactions. cell microbiol 2004,
6:201-211.
2.
rogers hj: cell death and organ development in plants.
curr top dev biol 2005, 71:225-261.
3.
soosaar jl, burch-smith tm, dinesh-kumar sp: mechanisms of
plant resistance to viruses. nat rev microbiol 2005, 3:789-798.
4.
lorrain s, vailleau f, balague c, roby d: lesion mimic mutants:
keys for deciphering cell death and defense pathways in
plants? trends plant sci 2003, 8:263-271.
5.
torres ma, dangl jl: functions of the respiratory burst oxidase
in biotic interactions, abiotic stress and development.
curr opin plant biol 2005, 8:397-403.
6.
delledonne m: no news is good news for plants. curr opin
plant biol 2005, 8:390-396.
7.

liu y, schiff m, czymmek k, talloczy z, levine b, dinesh-kumar sp:
autophagy regulates programmed cell death during the plant
innate immune response. cell 2005, 121:567-577.
this work established a close association between hr-pcd and autophagy. hr-pcd triggered by pathogen infection spreads in an uncontrolled fashion when the plant autophagy gene beclin 1 is silenced.
besides beclin 1, several other putative plant orthologs of yeast autophagy genes, such as class iii pi3k/vps30, atg3 and atg7, also function
to restrict pcd. this indicates that autophagy plays a central role in the
regulation of pcd during the plant innate immune response.
8.
klionsky dj: the molecular machinery of autophagy:
unanswered questions. j cell sci 2005, 118:7-18.
9.
levine b, klionsky dj: development by self-digestion:
molecular mechanisms and biological functions of autophagy.
dev cell 2004, 6:463-477.
www.sciencedirect.com
10. thompson ar, vierstra rd: autophagic recycling: lessons from
yeast help define the process in plants. curr opin plant biol
2005, 8:165-173.
11. bassham dc, laporte m, marty f, moriyasu y, ohsumi y,
olsen lj, yoshimoto k: autophagy in development and stress
responses of plants. autophagy 2006, 2:2-11.
12. hanaoka h, noda t, shirano y, kato t, hayashi h, shibata d,
tabata s, ohsumi y: leaf senescence and starvation-induced
chlorosis are accelerated by the disruption of an arabidopsis
autophagy gene. plant physiol 2002, 129:1181-1193.
13. ketelaar t, voss c, dimmock sa, thumm m, hussey pj:
arabidopsis homologues of the autophagy protein atg8 are a
novel family of microtubule binding proteins. febs lett 2004,
567:302-306.
14. doelling jh, walker jm, friedman em, thompson ar, vierstra rd:
the apg8/12-activating enzyme apg7 is required for proper
nutrient recycling and senescence in arabidopsis thaliana.
j biol chem 2002, 277:33105-33114.
15. marathe r, anandalakshmi r, liu y, dinesh-kumar sp:
the tobacco mosaic virus resistance gene n. mol plant pathol
2002, 3:167-172.
16. sumimoto h, miyano k, takeya r: molecular composition and
regulation of the nox family nad(p)h oxidases. biochem
biophys res commun 2005, 338:677-686.
17. torres ma, dangl jl, jones jd: arabidopsis gp91phox
homologues atrbohd and atrbohf are required for
accumulation of reactive oxygen intermediates in the plant
defense response. proc natl acad sci usa 2002, 99:517-522.
18. zeidler d, zahringer u, gerber i, dubery i, hartung t, bors w,
hutzler p, durner j: innate immunity in arabidopsis thaliana
lipopolysaccharides activate nitric oxide synthase (nos) and
induce defense genes. proc natl acad sci usa 2004, 101:1581115816.
this work showed that treatment of arabidopsis leaves and suspension
cells with lipopolysaccharides (lps) from gram-negative bacteria and
lipoteichoic acid from gram-positive bacteria triggered no production.
induction of no was followed by the activation of defense genes. further,
nitric oxide synthase (atnos1) mutants showed increased susceptibility to
the pathogen p. syringae.
19. brune b: the intimate relation between nitric oxide and
superoxide in apoptosis and cell survival. antioxid redox signal
2005, 7:497-507.
20. torres ma, jones jd, dangl jl: pathogen-induced, nadph
 oxidase-derived reactive oxygen intermediates suppress
spread of cell death in arabidopsis thaliana. nat genet 2005,
37:1130-1134.
this excellent paper extends the work of torres et al. [17]. the authors
created a triple mutant of atrbohd atrbohf lsd1. lsd1 is a lesion mimic
mutant that induces uncontrolled cell death and, unexpectedly, the triple
mutant amplifies the lsd1 mutant cell death phenotype. application of
exogenous superoxide activates rbohd function to negatively regulate
cell death in the lsd1 mutant. further, this work demonstrates that this cell
death is dependent on the plant immune response activator salicylic acid.
21. jabs t, dietrich ra, dangl jl: initiation of runaway cell death in
an arabidopsis mutant by extracellular superoxide. science
1996, 273:1853-1856.
22. yu l, alva a, su h, dutt p, freundt e, welsh s, baehrecke eh,
lenardo mj: regulation of an atg7–beclin 1 program of
autophagic cell death by caspase-8. science 2004,
304:1500-1502.
the caspase inhibitor zvad (n-benzyloxycarbonyl-valyl-alanyl-aspartylfluoromethylketone) induced non-apoptotic, possibly autophagic, cell
death in mouse l929 fibroblastic cells that required the autophagy genes
atg7 and beclin 1.
23. shimizu s, kanaseki t, mizushima n, mizuta t, arakawa
kobayashi s, thompson cb, tsujimoto y: role of bcl-2 family
proteins in a non-apoptotic programmed cell death dependent
on autophagy genes. nat cell biol 2004, 6:1221-1228.
bax/bak / double knockout mice that lack apoptosis were capable of
undergoing non-apoptotic death upon stimulation with etoposide. this
death was dependent on the presence of the autophagy genes atg5 and
beclin 1.
current opinion in plant biology 2006, 9:391–396
396 biotic interactions
24. lum jj, bauer de, kong m, harris mh, li c, lindsten t,
thompson cb: growth factor regulation of autophagy and
cell survival in the absence of apoptosis. cell 2005,
120:237-248.
the authors observe that autophagy is required for cell survival after
growth factor removal in apoptosis-deficient bax/bak / bone marrow
cells.
25. boya p, gonzalez-polo ra, casares n, perfettini jl, dessen p,
larochette n, metivier d, meley d, souquere s, yoshimori t et al.:
inhibition of macroautophagy triggers apoptosis. mol cell biol
2005, 25:1025-1040.
the authors show that hela cells die via an apoptotic pathway when
autophagy is compromised either genetically or pharmacologically. additionally, this death is abolished when the cells are treated with caspase
inhibitors, indicating that autophagy assists in cell survival by inhibiting
the induction of apoptosis.
26. pattingre s, tassa a, qu x, garuti r, liang xh, mizushima n,
 packer m, schneider md, levine b: bcl-2 antiapoptotic
proteins inhibit beclin 1-dependent autophagy. cell 2005,
122:927-939.
this excellent paper shows that the function of mammalian beclin 1
during autophagy is inhibited by its interaction with the anti-apoptotic
protein bcl-2, which binds to a domain that is speculated to be important
for autophagy. bcl-2’s interaction with beclin 1 disrupts the formation of
autophagosomes in yeast and mammalian cells. additionally, beclin 1
mutants that are unable to bind bcl-2 induce greater autophagy in mcf7
breast carcinoma cells than is seen in wildtype beclin 1 cells. the authors
conclude that, in addition to being an anti-apoptotic protein, bcl-2 is also
an anti-autophagy protein that helps maintain autophagy levels that
promote cell survival.
the authors show that the cysteine protease vacuolar processing enzyme
(vpe) possesses caspase-1 activity. silencing of vpe by vigs prevents
tmv-induced hr-pcd in tobacco plants.
30. seay m, dinesh-kumar sp: life after death: are autophagy
genes involved in cell death and survival during plant innate
immune responses? autophagy 2005, 1:185-186.
this review discusses the two contrasting roles of the plant vacuole
during pathogen infection: one being cell death mediated by vpe and the
second being cell survival mediated by autophagy.
31. vivanco i, sawyers cl: the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase akt
pathway in human cancer. nat rev cancer 2002, 2:489-501.
32. devarenne tp, ekengren sk, pedley kf, martin gb: adi3 is a
 pdk1-interacting agc kinase that negatively regulates plant
cell death. embo j 2006, 25:255-265.
the work described in this paper identifies adi3, a homolog of pkb/akt
that interacts with both avrpto (a p. syringae effector protein) and pto
kinase (a tomato resistance protein). silencing of either adi3 or its
phosphorylator pdk1 leads to cell death, indicating that this pathway
negatively regulates plant pcd.
33. mueller-roeber b, pical c: inositol phospholipid metabolism in
arabidopsis. characterized and putative isoforms of inositol
phospholipid kinase and phosphoinositide-specific
phospholipase c. plant physiol 2002, 130:22-46.
34. deak m, casamayor a, currie ra, downes cp, alessi dr:
characterization of a plant 3-phosphoinositide-dependent
protein kinase-1 homologue which contains a pleckstrin
homology domain. febs lett 1999, 451:220-226.
27. liang xh, kleeman lk, jiang hh, gordon g, goldman je, berry g,
herman b, levine b: protection against fatal sindbis virus
encephalitis by beclin 1, a novel bcl-2-interacting protein.
j virol 1998, 72:8586-8596.
35. scarlatti f, bauvy c, ventruti a, sala g, cluzeaud f, vandewalle a,
ghidoni r, codogno p: ceramide-mediated macroautophagy
involves inhibition of protein kinase b and up-regulation of
beclin 1. j biol chem 2004, 279:18384-18391.
28. ho pk, hawkins cj: mammalian initiator apoptotic caspases.
febs j 2005, 272:5436-5453.
36. liang h, yao n, song jt, luo s, lu h, greenberg jt: ceramides
modulate programmed cell death in plants. genes dev 2003,
17:2636-2641.
29. hatsugai n, kuroyanagi m, yamada k, meshi t, tsuda s,
kondo m, nishimura m, hara-nishimura i: a plant vacuolar
protease, vpe, mediates virus-induced hypersensitive cell
death. science 2004, 305:855-858.
current opinion in plant biology 2006, 9:391–396
37. townley he, mcdonald k, jenkins gi, knight mr, leaver cj:
ceramides induce programmed cell death in arabidopsis cells
in a calcium-dependent manner. biol chem 2005, 386:161-166.
www.sciencedirect.com